In the year [music] 1618,
the Castellian Spaniard Garcia Dilva E
Figueroa was traveling through the
heartlands of Persia in what is today
Iran.
By then, Figueroa was about 61 years of
age, a venerable statesman who had set
out from Spain 4 years earlier as an
ambassador from King Philip III.
His mission was to meet with the Sha of
the Sapphavid Persian Empire, flatter
and befriend him, and encourage him to
go to war with their common rival, the
Ottoman Empire.
But Figueroa's embassy got off to a bad
start.
When he arrived at the sha's court, the
Persian ruler tried to entertain his
guest with a display of dancing girls,
but the aging and pious Spaniard was
unimpressed.
Figueroa later wrote about what happened
in [music] his ambassador's report.
The king then told all those present
that the Spanish ambassador because of
his advanced age did not like watching
dancing girls. And turning to the
ambassador he said it's no good trying
to deceive us leading us to believe that
it is due to your virtue when we know
that the real reason is the impetence of
your advanced age. At this he and the
other two ambassadors burst into
laughter.
Rayan Muto.
>> Now that he was an object of ridicule,
Figueroa's diplomatic aims would also
come to nothing, and he soon left the
sha's court, despondent with his mission
in ruins.
The old Spaniard set out on the journey
home, but on his way he consoled himself
by taking in some of the sights of the
lands of Persia.
Traveling through the mountainous region
of the Iranian plateau, he and his
guides enjoyed the fruitful lands still
watered by ancient aqueducts.
They praise the many palm trees and
fruit orchards that are irrigated with
that good water for their beauty and
pleasant appearance, especially the many
orange and lemon trees which produced
sweet lemons. These can be compared to
the other ones from Valencia, Spain. In
fact, they may even be better in Espa.
It was while traveling through this
pleasant region known as the Marv Dashed
plateau along the main road between
Isvahan and Shiraz that his guides
recommended they stop at a place that
was surrounded by [snorts] folklore,
myths, and mystery. It was a site they
called Chahel Minar, which in Persian
means the 40 pillars.
As they approached and Figueroa caught a
glimpse of it in the mouth of a wide
valley, he would have found out why. On
the horizon were the towering shapes of
a great number of massive stone columns
reaching up into the sky.
After crossing the river Brahmir, we
traveled through a beautiful valley
where the river fed many streams and
ditches. Many populated villages and
large herds of cattle of all kinds could
be seen. Finally, from a distance, we
could see the highest of the columns or
minoretses of Chahel Minar, only visible
through a thick forest of orchards at
the foot of a tall mountain.
As they drew nearer, they caught sight
of what lay ahead of them. A sprawling
mass of impressive ruins carved from
massive blocks of black stone.
After the ambassador had eaten and
rested, he was filled with a desire to
see this famous and great structure that
was so worthy of examination and study.
Not only because of its antiquity, but
also because of its stupendous and
magnificent size, especially since no
one else had ever written the kind of
accurate and aerodite description it
deserved.
For much of that afternoon, Figueroa
explored the ruins of this once grand
city, which must have been built to
[music] a staggering scale.
A very thick wall made of square stones
enclosed a large area at the foot of the
mountain. It was of marvelous
dimensions, standing over two pikes
tall, having been constructed with
admirable symmetry and beautiful
proportions. There were 48 standing
columns in all. Some of them were seen
to be broken and partially buried in the
ground and big pieces of others were
spread around all over the plane.
Veliano.
Although much of what remained was a
crumbling mass of shattered stone and
brick, in other places he was astonished
to see how well the structures had stood
the test of time.
We climbed both stairways to find a
portico or entrance supported by two
huge horses that were constructed from
white marble. each of them bigger than a
large elephant with enormous wings and
lionine of horoscity.
The stairway as a whole seemed to have
been finished just yesterday.
This great and wonderful structure for
incalculable centuries had resisted the
ravages of time which erodess and
consumes all things.
In places, the polished stone was still
so fine that it even caused some
confusion to one particular member of
their expedition.
The lower sections were set with slabs
of black stone that were so burnished
and polished that anyone who stepped
close to it could see his reflection. It
happened that the ambassador's dog saw
its own reflection in the inner surface.
It began snarling and showing his teeth.
And since its shadow and reflection
performed the same actions, it attacked
with great impetus and fury, attempting
to bite the slab and rising up on its
hind legs, much to the mirth of those
present.
Figueroa was a great reader of classical
history and felt sure that he knew what
this once great city had been. It was
the fabled Persian capital of Pepilolis.
[music]
After closely observing the location of
its beautiful and fertile countryside
and the proximity of the ancient Araxes
River, not only was there no doubt that
this was once the site of the great and
celebrated Pipilus, but anyone who sees
the superb and magnificent monuments of
such ancient majesty can declare it to
be such with certainty.
For its antiquity [music]
and the grandeur of its perfection and
the imperishability of the material of
which it is built, Pipilis is
incomparable to any of the other wonders
that antiquity has bequath to us.
Antigua
Figueroa's letter home about his journey
would be the first written account to
accurately identify the ruins of Chahel
Minar as the ancient Persian [music]
capital.
For centuries, this city had stood at
the heart of what was at the time the
largest empire the world had ever seen.
the empire known today as the Aminid or
simply Persian [music] Empire.
It was a power that had ruled over a
vast territory nearly the size of the
United States today and brought
countless different cultures together
within its borders.
But for nearly two millennia, the ruins
of Pepilolis had stood alone in the
rocky highlands. Now a mystery wreathd
with folklore and legend. The names of
its builders forgotten and with no one
left to tell their story.
>> [music]
>> My name is Paul Cooper and you're
listening to the Fall of Civilizations
podcast.
Each episode I look at a civilization of
the past that rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of history. I
want to ask what did they have in
common? What led to their fall? And what
did it feel like to be a person alive at
the time who witnessed the end of their
world?
In this episode, I want to tell the
story of the Aminid Persian Empire. I
want to show how this remarkable ancient
power sprung up from the rubble of a
ruined world to become the most powerful
human society on earth. I want to
[music] show how they raised their grand
palaces and monuments and brought an
unprecedented number of people together
within their borders. I want to show how
they came into conflict and cooperation
with other ancient peoples. And finally,
I want to show what happened to bring
the palaces of the Persian kings
crashing down in fire and flame.
The story of Persia begins in the ashes
of the old world. The world left behind
by the Assyrian Empire.
As we saw in our 13th episode, for much
of the second and first millennia BC,
the Assyrian Empire had been one of the
great powers of the ancient world.
They had sprung up in the northern
reaches of the river Tigris in
Mesopotamia in what is now northern Iraq
and Kurdistan
and from there had expanded their
military might to eclipse all others.
Assyria had ruled the region of
Mesopotamia aided by its massive armies
which were equipped with iron weapons
and armor and crushed all resistance to
their empire.
In 729 BC, the Assyrians were powerful
enough to finally conquer their greatest
rival, the largest and most powerful
city in the southern marshlands of
Mesopotamia,
the city of Babylon, where our story
begins.
Babylon was at that time the world's
greatest metropolis.
Since its founding more than a thousand
years earlier, it had grown to become
the largest city in the world at two
points in its history and was probably
the first city to have a population
above 200,000 people.
The great city of Babylon was now
absorbed into the Assyrian Empire, but
it would always be a difficult and
rebellious subject. Its people were
proud and belonged to an ancient lineage
of independent kings. The Babylonians
spoke their own dialect and their god
named Marduk rivaled the Assyrian
deities in prominence.
This meant that throughout the
occupation of their city, Babylon's
rulers were always looking for their
chance to rise up and throw off the yoke
of their Assyrian masters.
There was a time when the might of
Assyria must have looked completely
unbeatable.
But when the fall of Assyria came, it
came all at once as a thunderclap.
And it was the city of Babylon that
proved instrumental in its collapse.
After the death of the last great king
of Assyria, Asho Banipal, a period of
weak kings and civil wars followed. And
during this time, all of Assyria's
enemies took the opportunity to unite
against it.
In the south, the Babylonians finally
saw their moment. They rebelled and
crowned a man named Nabo Palasa as the
new king of an independent Babylon. As
one chronicle recalls,
>> on the 26th day of Arosna,
Nabopolasar sat on the throne in
Babylon. This was the beginning of the
reign of Nabopolasar.
The Assyrians had dealt with Babylonian
rebellions before, but this time would
be different.
Now the rebelling Babylonians were
joined by a number of powerful allies.
Chief among these were a hardy horsering
people known as the Mes who lived in the
mountains and high plains of what is now
Iran.
In the year 615 BC, while Assyria was
trying to contain the Babylonian revolt,
the Mes swept down into the river plains
of the Assyrian Empire, raiding and
ravaging as they went.
The Assyrians were now fighting a war on
two fronts against two very different
enemies, and their mighty edifice began
rapidly to crumble.
One Babylonian carved stellle dated
around the middle of the 6th century BC
records this alliance of Babylon and the
Mes who they refer to with the name Umun
Manda, a name that evokes a terrifying
horde sent by the gods.
The god Marduk provided Nabapolasar,
king of Babylon, with help and gave him
a companion for himself. The king of the
Umman Mander, who has no rival, he
caused to come to his aid. Above and
below, from right and left, the Umman
Mandanda swept like a floodstorm,
avenging Babylon in retaliation.
The Mes rode swiftly across the land and
overwhelmed the Assyrian forces.
One by one, they besieged and captured
each of the great Assyrian cities that
for centuries had swelled with the
wealth of their empire.
Many of Assyria's cities were destroyed
so utterly that they would never return
as centers of population.
The bodies of their hopeless defenders
left to rot in the streets and buried
beneath fallen masonry. Their bones left
to be covered by the sands.
This event, the collapse of the Assyrian
Empire, was one of the swiftest and most
[music] dramatic rearrangements of power
in world history.
The largest empire on Earth had been
toppled in only about 3 years, and in
its wake, it left a yawning chasm.
In dividing up the territory of Assyria
and the lands beyond, the Mes and the
Babylonians mostly stuck to what they
knew best.
Like the Assyrians, the Babylonians were
a settled people who lived in villages,
towns, [music] and walled cities with
sophisticated art, technology, and an
advanced understanding [music]
of mathematics and writing.
They fielded large infantry armies
[music] fed from fields watered by
complex irrigation systems where they
grew barley, wheat, and fruit orchards.
They were masters of trade and their
[music] grand cities were respplendant
with goods brought from all over the
Eurasian landmass, [music] carried up
and down the rivers Tigris and Euphrates
on barges.
For this reason, they happily swept
north [music] and captured many of the
Assyrian cities that still remained
after the destruction [music] that the
Mes left behind.
These they absorbed into a new
Babylonian Empire that in size,
geography, and structure looked very
much like the Assyrian Empire it had
replaced.
But the Rocky Mountains to the north and
east they left to the Hardy Mes.
The Mes were in fact only one of
countless peoples who had lived for
millennia [music] in the rocky highlands
of Iran's Zagros mountains.
Beginning around 100 million years ago,
the Arabian tectonic plate began driving
northwards into the Eurasian plate. And
over the next tens of millions of years,
the constant pressure bent and buckled
the land of the Eurasian side in what
geologists call a fold and thrust zone.
Today, this landscape is known as the
Iranian plateau.
At its southern edge, it looks like a
piece of rumpled fabric, a series of
alternating mountain ridges and deep
valleys that are known as the Zagros
mountains.
The region of the south Zagros would
become known as P and it is from this
word that the name Persia would derive.
In the late 4th century BC, the Greek
historian Heronomous of Cardia wrote the
following description of the landscape
of Persia.
high land blessed with a healthy climate
and full of the fruits appropriate to
the season. There were Glenn's heavily
wooded and shady cultivated trees of
various kinds in parks and also
naturally converging glades and hills of
trees of every sort and streams of
water. So the travelers lingered with
delight in places pleasantly inviting
repose. Also there was an abundance of
cattle of every kind.
Through these mountains cut an ancient
and wellused highway later known as the
Horasan road.
The word Horasan means sunrise since
this highway led to the east and the
regions where the sun rose and
ultimately to the vast deserts and arid
grasslands of the Eurasian step.
As it would be for much of human
history, the step was then home to great
numbers of nomadic horse riding peoples
who lived by hering cattle and other
animals and moving from place to place
to find ever newer pastures.
Over the millennia, countless different
[music] peoples had passed along it,
moving out of the Great Step and into
the shady valleys of northern [music]
Iran.
The first known of these people arrived
more than 4,000 years [music] ago and
called themselves the Arya, a word that
in old Iranian languages likely meant
noble or lord.
They came from a vast area of central
Asia known in Sanskrit as Arya or the
home of the Arian people.
Today the word Arian still forms the
ethmological root of the modern name of
the nation today Iran.
Alongside these area came further waves
of migrations from the step into the
sheltered hills and valleys of Persia.
While much of the interior of Iran is
characterized by vast sand dune deserts,
the mountainous regions along the
Caspian Sea are exceedingly green,
forested with oak, and many of the
highland plateaus are wellwatered and
lined with popular trees.
Alongside these area came further waves
of migration into [clears throat] these
sheltered hills and [music] valleys. As
a group, these people are today referred
to as the proto Iranians. And they spoke
many different related Iranian
languages. Among them, Old Avest, one of
the oldest [music] preserved languages
in the Indo-Uropean family.
Because this is the same family as
English, we can actually find a lot of
linguistic similarity with our own
language.
For instance, the old Avestin word for
daughter is dugar. Mother was martr and
their word for brother was brater.
These proto Iranians settled all over
central Asia from Afghanistan and
Pakistan to the hills of Iran. And
everywhere they went they developed a
wide range of cultures all speaking
related languages.
Among these people were the Baktrees or
Bactreans, the Sugoda or Sugdians, the
Parthava or Paththeians, and importantly
for our story in the west of the Iranian
plateau appeared the MA or Mes.
While the Babylonians were a centralized
and stratified kingdom with a king at
the top, officials beneath and priests
and administrators running the empire,
the Mes were likely more of a loose
collection of tribes bound together in a
system of alliances, blood oaths, and
relationships of marriage. Assyrian
records particularly mention the skill
of the Mes in horseback riding and
Assyrian sources always mention with
pride the many fine horses they seized
whenever they raided the Median lands.
As this inscription by the Assyrian king
Tiglath Pelaza III shows,
>> in my ninth regal year, I ordered my
armies to march against the Mes. I
conquered their cities, defeated them
and took their spoil.
130 horses from Bitishar and its
districts.
120 horses from the cities of Guinea,
Zinanu, Sadbat, Cisad. 100 horses from
Upachitapsi.
100 horses of Ushro of Nikisi.
100 horses at Ukatar and Bada.
The Assyrians had long put down the Mes
with these kinds of raids, but now with
the Assyrian Empire fallen, the Mes were
free to expand.
They had been living and thriving in the
mountains for centuries. And so while
the Babylonians took the fertile
riverlands of Mesopotamia, the Mes had
free reign over the hills and [music]
mountains in a broad stretch of what is
now Iran, Aabaijan, Syria, and Turkey.
It's not clear the exact [music]
geographic bounds of their empire or how
centralized it ever was, but of all the
peoples of the region, they were the
greatest rival [music] to the power of
Babylon.
So this is the world as we begin our
story.
In the fertile lowlands of Mesopotamia,
the new Babylonian Empire was just
beginning to find its feet as an
imperial [music] power. And in the rocky
mountains to the north and east were the
loose tribal confederation of the horse
rearing me.
This was a world of new and fragile
powers, unstable, uncertain, and [music]
now increasingly paranoid.
But for the right man, it could also be
a world for the taking.
It was into this landscape around the
year 600 BC that a man was born who
would shake up this fragile equilibrium
and change the course of history. His
name in old Persian was Kurush. But he
has gone down in history by the name
given to him by the Greeks,
Cyrus.
And he would come to be known as Cyrus
the Great.
Cyrus or Kurush was born into a family
that ruled the province of Anan in the
Zagros mountains in southwestern Iran.
The province was centered around the
ancient city of Anan, which had once
been the original homeland of the people
of Elam, an old and powerful society.
Butlam had been all but destroyed by the
Assyrian Empire in a cataclysmic war
only 50 years or so earlier. As one
tablet written by the Assyrian king
Ashobanipal describes
the great holy city abode of their gods,
seat of their mysteries I conquered. I
entered its palaces. I destroyed the
ziggurat. I smashed its shining copper
horns. I reduced the temples of Elim to
N. Their gods and goddesses I scattered
to the winds.
After this destruction, what had once
been a united Elomite kingdom fractured.
Now the city of Anan stood in a state of
ruin. Its population much reduced from
its former glory.
into this wasted land. Sometime over the
preceding century, a number of nomadic
Iranian peoples had migrated from the
north.
They were cultural and linguistic
cousins to the Mes and agreed to swear
allegiance to the Median king, likely
offering to pay him tribute and fight
for him in times of war.
Archaeology shows them living a
semi-nomadic lifestyle among the ruins,
pitching their tents among the fallen
columns and crumbling brick walls of the
old Elomite capital.
Since their arrival, these Iranian
peoples intermarried and merged with
what remained of the local Elommites,
adopting some of their ancient dress and
customs.
And there they formed a new hybrid
culture, one that was half nomadic and
half belonging to the ancient devastated
civilization of Elam.
The three major tribes that made up
these people were the Maspia, the
Marafia, and the Paragad.
These were the people that today we call
the Persians. And it was into this
society that the baby boy Cyrus was
born.
It's worth pausing here and mentioning
that we know very little for sure about
the early life of Cyrus.
His is a childhood that is [music]
wreathd in myth and mystery.
That's because for much of the more than
two millennia since the Persian Empire
flourished, their story has been told
largely by another people. A people who
at times admired and emulated them and
at others hated [music] and feared them
and against whom they fought many bitter
wars.
These were the people who lived in the
rocky islands and mountainous mainlands
where the Mediterranean meets [music]
the Black Sea. the Greeks
and one Greek in particular who has been
given the name the father of history.
His name [music] was Heroditus.
Heroditus was born in the city of
Hakarnasus [music]
now the Turkish port town of Bodram
around the year 485 BC [music]
more than a 100red years after the birth
of Cyrus the Great.
He was a Greek. But this wasn't at all a
simple identity.
Greece was at that time divided between
clusters of about [music] a thousand
independent city states speaking
dialects including Ionian, Dorian, Attic
and Aolon and all constantly waring
amongst [music] themselves.
The writer Plato famously describes the
Greek cities like so.
>> The earth is very large and we who dwell
between the pillars of Hercules and the
river Fasis live in a small part of it
around the sea like ants or frogs about
a pond.
But these cities were united by a shared
culture, language, and [music] reverence
for a shared pantheon of gods.
When he reached the age of about 30,
Heroditus felt a calling to travel.
Around the year 454 BC, he set out from
his home of Hikarnasses and traveled to
Egypt and [music] Libya. Then through
Palestine to the Phoenician city of Ty,
and after that down the river Euphrates,
possibly as far as Babylon.
Everywhere he went, [music] he asked
people what they knew of the past of
their region, and he wrote down
everything he saw and heard as he went.
These accounts [music] he compiled into
nine books he called historii, which in
ancient Greek meant [music] researches
or inquiries,
but is the origin of our word history.
In the introduction to his work,
Herodotus explains [music]
what motivated him.
Heroditus of Harley
hereby publishes the results of [music]
his inquiries.
hoping to do two things. To preserve the
memory of the past by putting on record
the astonishing achievements both of the
Greek and the non-Greek peoples and more
particularly to show how the two races
came into conflict.
There was no publishing industry in
ancient Greece, no printing press or
mass production of books. And so
Heroditus wrote his work to be read
aloud to audiences of citizens, often at
popular festivals.
One account by the writer Lucian claims
that Heroditus first debuted his
histories by reading them aloud at the
Olympic Games to a wrapped audience.
>> The great Olympian Games were at hand,
and Heroditus thought this the
opportunity he had been hoping for.
He waited for a packed audience to
assemble, one containing the most
eminent men from all Greece. He appeared
in the temple chamber, presenting
himself as a competitor for an Olympic
honor. Then he recited his histories,
and so bewitched his audience that his
books were called after the muses, for
they too were nine in number. By this
time he was much better known than the
Olympic victors themselves. He had only
to appear and he was pointed out. That
is that Heroditus who wrote the tale of
the Persian wars.
Perhaps due to this need to captivate
[music] a crowd, Heroditus was a writer
who brought his stories to [music] life
in vivid color full [snorts] of dramatic
characters, strange lands, gory murders,
dream visions and [music] prophecies,
and sometimes fantastical creatures.
Even for some ancient Greeks, Herodotus'
wild tales [music] went too far.
Plutarch would later write a blistering
essay entitled On the Malice of
Heroditus, [music]
tearing apart much of his histories. And
the writer Tissus, [music] himself, also
a source on the Persian Empire,
supposedly rubbished many of Heroditus'
[music] claims, too, as related by the
chronicler Fosius.
He differs almost entirely from
Heroditus whom he accuses of falsehood
in many passages and calls an inventor
of fables.
But historians generally consider Tissus
[music] even less reliable than
Heroditus.
Even worse still is Zenapon's biography
of Cyrus the Great titled Chyropedia,
[music] which is best described as a
piece of fanfiction, in which the Greek
soldier and writer uses Cyrus as a blank
slate onto which he can project a
fictional version of an idealized king.
But for better or worse, for many of the
events that follow, Heroditus is the
only source we [music] have available.
That's because in the light of history,
the Persians themselves are all but
silent.
The Persians never wrote down the kind
of narrative histories that made [music]
Heroditus famous
for learning about their past. They
relied on a cast of oral storytellers or
singers who would regail their people
with stories of [music] the old times.
As the Greek writer Strao records,
as teachers of learning, they use the
wisest men who weave in legends in order
to make it useful, both with and without
song. They recite the deeds of the gods
and the noblest men.
Just like Heroditus, these tales were
designed to be read out loud to an
audience. But instead of writing them
down, their storytellers simply
remembered them using astonishing feats
of memory.
These tales they would have passed on to
one another by word of mouth so long as
the tradition of storytellers continued.
But for this reason, the Persians are
not able to tell their own story in the
light of history.
The historian Lloyd Llewellyn Jones puts
the dilemma for historians bluntly.
We cannot believe much of what Heroditus
says. And yet we cannot do without him.
Some historical truths about the
Persians may well lie hidden in
Heroditus, but one needs to dig deep
through the layers of fantasy and
fiction to find them.
In the end, trying to glean the truth
about this very ancient past can feel
like exploring the depths of the deep
ocean where a single beam of light might
illuminate whole ecosystem or an
undiscovered species living down in the
depths.
But elsewhere in all directions, there
is only darkness.
Like many momentous figures [music] of
this time, such fantasy and fiction
completely shrouds the early life of
Cyrus the Great.
What we know for sure is that Cyrus was
born into a royal family.
He was the son of a Persian ruler named
King Kambisces I of Ansibly
his wife Mandane who was reportedly a
me.
As such, Cyrus may have grown up
speaking both old Persian and his
mother's tongue of Median.
His mother Mandane was also royalty.
She was the daughter of the ruling king
of the Mes, a man named Astiagis, who
all the tribes of the Persians swore
loyalty to.
As such, Cyrus was likely born the
immediate heir to the province of Anshan
and through his mother, a distant heir
to the throne of the entire [music]
Median Empire. a unique situation that
his mother would no doubt have reminded
him of many times throughout his
childhood.
One legendary account of Cyrus's birth
and upbringing is given by Heroditus.
The first year after the marriage of his
daughter, Aiyagi saw a vision. A vine
appeared to spring from his daughter
which overspread all Asia.
On this occasion also he consulted his
interpreters. The result was that he
sent for his daughter from Persia. When
the time of her delivery approached, the
magi had declared the vision to intimate
that the child of his daughter should
supplant him on the throne. On her
arrival, he kept a strict watch over
her, intending to destroy her child.
Unable to kill the small baby himself,
Aiyagis enlists the help of a general
named Harpagus and tells him to take the
baby Cyrus out into the wilds and there
leave him in the open to die.
But Harpagus takes pity on the child and
lets him live.
He instantly sent for a herdsman who, as
he knew, pursued his occupation in a
place among mountains, frequented by
savage beasts. When the herdsman had
received his orders, he took the child
and returned to [music] his cottage.
From here, this fairy tale unfolds with
a colorful brutality.
When the boy's identity is finally
discovered, the king Astiagis is enraged
and realizes that the general Harpagus
has betrayed him.
As punishment, he orders that Harpagus'
son is to be secretly killed.
Then he invites the general to a banquet
at which he puts on a lurid spectacle.
Before the rest, as well as before
Astiakis himself, dishes of mutton were
placed. But to Harpagus, all the [music]
body of his son was served, except the
head and the extremities, which were
kept apart in a covered basket.
After he seemed well satisfied, Aiagis
asked him how he liked his fair.
Harpagus expressed himself greatly
delighted. The attendants then brought
him the basket which contained the head
and extremities of his child and desired
him to help himself to what he [music]
thought proper. Harpagus uncovered the
vessel and beheld the remains of his
son. He continued, however, a master of
himself and betrayed no unusual
emotions.
When Aiyakis inquired if he knew of what
flesh he had eaten, he acknowledged that
he did. and that the king's will was
always pleasing to him. Saying this, he
took the remains of the body and
returned to his house, meaning as I
suppose, to bury them together.
Agajis thus revenged himself upon
Harpagus.
Despite taking this brutal revenge on
his general, Astiagi's court priests or
magi convinced the Median king not to
kill Cyrus and to let him go.
But the general Harpagus would never
forget what the king had done.
This story would no doubt have thrilled
Herodas' audience as he read it out to
them, but we can be relatively sure that
it is a piece of mythology.
The trope of the abandoned child is one
that reoccurs throughout folklore and
myth. From the Greek story of Edypus to
the Accordian king Sargon to Moses and
the fairy tale Snow White,
the story of the king's vision is
another theme that often occurs in the
early lives of great men and perhaps
most famously in the Gospel of Matthew
when King Herod orders all the baby boys
in Jerusalem to be killed when told of
the birth of Jesus.
And the most colorful and bloodthirsty
part, the revenge taken by tricking
someone into eating the flesh of their
loved ones, also occurs throughout
mythology and folklore. Featuring, for
instance, in the sixth book of Ovid's
Metamorphosis,
which then inspired Shakespeare's
bloodthirsty play, Titus Andronicus.
For all these reasons, it's safe to
assume that this story of Cyrus's early
life is a work of literature rather than
fact.
But I include it to give a sense of the
kinds of stories that constantly swirled
around the life of this enigmatic
character as an example of why the
accounts of Heroditus need to be treated
carefully as we go forward. And of
course, because no one can resist a good
story.
The rest of what we know about Cyrus's
life can be gleaned in fragments.
[music]
The Greek writer Zenapon records what
Persians some centuries later still
remembered [music] about the character
of Cyrus.
Even to [music] this day, the barbarians
tell in story and in song that Cyrus was
most handsome in person, most generous
of heart, most devoted to learning, and
most ambitious, so that he endured all
sorts of labor and faced [music] all
sorts of danger for the sake of praise.
As a boy, the young Cyrus would have
been raised with all the skills needed
by a man of the Persian royal line. The
first 5 years of a boy's life he would
spend with his mother and the other
women of [music] the tribe as Heroditus
describes
until his fifth year. His father does
not lay eyes on the boy who spends his
time with the woman. This is done
[music] so that if he dies during his
upbringing, he will not distress his
father.
During this time, his mother would have
cared for her son, taught him the
language and the songs of her people,
and all the while must have looked
[music] at her little son growing, and
wondered whether one day he might
[music] be destined for great things.
But after that, [music] the boy was
handed over to his father and taught the
ways of men.
Although our typical impression of
Persian [music] royalty derived largely
from Greek sources is one of luxury and
decadence. In fact, the early life of
Cyrus would have been quite different.
The Persians were a hardy pastoral
people who survived by hering cattle,
hunting on horseback with a bow and
arrow, and with trained hawks. And these
are all the skills that the young Cyrus
would have learned. [music] As the Greek
writer Strao recounts,
from age 5 to 25, they are trained to
shoot with the bow, handle the spear,
ride on horseback, and speak the truth.
They gather the boys in one place after
rousing them before dawn with the noise
of a bronze instrument, and order them
to follow in a race. After marking out a
distance of 30 to 40 stadia,
>> Strao records the broad education that a
Persian prince was required to absorb.
They train them in speaking loudly, how
to breathe and use their lungs and to
endure heat and cold and rain and to
cross torrents and also to her flocks
and live outdoors, surviving on wild
fruit, terabinth, acorns, wild pears.
Their daily diet after exercising
consists of bread, barley, cardamom,
grains of salt, and baked or boiled meat
and water to drink. They hunt by hurling
spears from horseback and with bows and
lassos.
Towards evening, they learn to cultivate
plants, how to cut and collect roots,
how to make weapons, and the technique
of making linen cloth and hunter nets.
But while the Persians still lived a
relatively humble and hardy existence,
the later Greek writer Zenapon records
that by this time the Mes were quite
different.
Cyrus noticed that his grandfather Aiges
was wearing makeup with eyes outlined,
color rubbed on his face, and false hair
as was the median fashion. All this is
median, as are the purple tunics and
sleeved coats, the necklaces worn around
the neck and the bracelets on their
wrists. While the Persians, even now in
their homes, have simpler clothes and a
more humble lifestyle.
When Cyrus was grown, he succeeded his
father as the ruler of the Persian tribe
of the Pasarad. And it's then that he
found himself coming into conflict with
his grandfather, the king of the Mes,
Aiagis.
The exact details of this conflict we
can never know. But it's clear that
Cyrus saw his moment.
He gathered the tribes of the Persians
around him. The Pasagai, Marafia, the
Masipia, the Derusiad, Germania, Dai,
Mardi, and Sagatia. All of them united
by their language and shared culture.
Heroditus imagines Cyrus giving a
rousing speech.
Cyrus collected and slaughtered all his
father's goats, sheep, and oxen in
preparation for entertaining the whole
Persian army at a banquet together with
the best wine and bread he could
procure. The next day, the guests
assembled and were told to sit down on
the grass and enjoy themselves.
Men of Persia, he exclaimed, "You are
the arbiters of your own fortune. My
voice is the voice of freedom. I am the
instrument of your prosperity.
Decline all future obedience to Aiagis."
[music]
The Persians, who had long spurned at
the yoke imposed on them, were glad of
such a leader and ardently obeyed the
call of liberty.
All the tribes of the Persian peoples
now united around Cyrus.
Aiyagis was naturally enraged.
He ordered that all his court
soothsayers who had long ago convinced
him to spare and release Cyrus should be
crucified.
Then with their screams still echoing in
his ears, he gathered his armies and
marched out to meet the Persian upstart.
As he marched, he sent out messengers
demanding in furious terms that Cyrus
come and bow at his feet. As Heroditus
recounts,
Cyrus sent the messenger back with the
threat that he would be there a good
deal sooner than Astiagi's [music]
liked. Aiagis thereupon armed the mess
to a man and so far lost his wits as
[music] to appoint Harpagus to command
them, having apparently forgotten how he
had treated him. The result was [music]
that when he took the field and engaged
the Persian army, some of Harpagus's men
deserted to the Persians, and the
greater number deliberately sherked
fighting [music] and took to their
heels.
With the betrayal of this general,
Aiyagis was forced to gather a militia
made up of what citizens he could find
and made a lastditch attempt to stop the
army of Cyrus.
When Aiagis learned of the disgraceful
collapse of the Median army, he armed
all Mes
and over military age who had been left
in the city, led them out to battle and
was defeated. His men were killed and he
himself was taken alive.
Harpagus was a real person attested in a
number of sources. And one inscription
found on a clay tablet in the ruins of
Babylon known as the Nabonidis Chronicle
also hints at a betrayal by one of
Aiagis's generals, although the general
isn't named.
In the sixth year, King Age called up
his troops and marched against Cyrus,
king of Anshan, in order to meet him in
battle. The army of Ageis revolted
against him and in fetterss they
delivered him to Cyrus. Cyrus marched
against the country of Ebatina. The
royal residents he seized. silver, gold,
other valuables of the countrybata he
took as loot and brought to Anan.
Whether because Aiyagis really was the
sadistic tyrant that Heroditus claims,
we don't know. But after this, Harpagus
would go on to become one of Cyrus's
most loyal generals.
And Heroditus claims that after the
battle, Harpagus came to jeer at the
captured Aiagis.
After the capture of Aiagis, Harpagus
came and jered at him, asking what it
felt like to be a slave instead of a
king. Then said, Aiagis,
"You are not only the wickedest, but the
most stupid of men. As things are, the
innocent Mes have become slaves instead
of masters, and the Persians, masters of
the Mes.
Cyrus was now the lord of the
mountainous regions of the Near East,
stretching from Persia right up to
perhaps their most powerful rival.
This was a kingdom in the region of Asia
Minor in what is now western Turkey, the
kingdom of Lydia.
The Lydians were an ancient people. They
were even mentioned in Homer's epic, the
Iliad, where they are listed among the
allies of the Trojans.
They spoke their own Lydian language
which was in the same Indo-Uropean
family as Persian and Greek. And
according to the account of Heroditus,
throughout the war between Cyrus and
Aiagis, the king of Lydia had been
watching.
He believed he had sensed an opening to
take advantage of the chaos and expand
his borders even further. His name was
Cryus.
Criesus' kingdom of Lydia was
astonishingly rich.
In fact, the legendary king Midas, who
had the power to [music] turn anything
to gold with his touch, was supposed to
have once ruled over one of its [music]
regions.
Lydia stood above a rich seam of
electrum, a naturally occurring alloy of
gold and silver that its people had
eagerly mined for centuries. And in the
preceding decades, they had learned how
to remove the silver from this alloy to
create coins of pure gold on an
industrial [music]
scale.
As the first people in the world to
produce gold in this manner, the Lydians
were soon at the heart of the world's
most lucrative industry.
As a result, King Cryus soon gained a
reputation [music]
as a new Midas, the richest man in the
world.
Plutarch in his life of Salon gives one
description of his legendary appearance
at the Lydian capital of Sardis.
He was decked out with everything in the
way of precious [music] stones, dyed
raignment and wrought gold that men deem
remarkable or extravagant [music] or
enviable in order that he might present
a most and gorgeous spectacle.
With these vast riches, [music]
King Cryus of Lydia had also spent
lavishly on his army, the pride of which
was a wing of well-trained armored
cavalry, [music]
as Herodotus recounts.
Now, at this time, there was no nation
in Asia more valiant or warlike than the
Lydian.
It was their custom to fight on
horseback carrying long [music] spears
and they were skilled in the management
of horses.
With this force and bankrolled by his
almost limitless wealth, Cryus had gone
to war from the moment he became king.
He ruthlessly conquered the various
Greek citystate colonies that had been
founded on the western coast of Asia
Minor. the regions of Ionia, Aolia, and
Doria until he ruled virtually all of
the western segment of what is now
Turkey.
But still he dreamed of more
and he had watched the civil war
unfolding in far off Persia with some
interest.
Criesus was actually the brother-in-law
of the Median king Astiagis, having
married his sister as part of a peace
treaty. one in which he had promised to
keep his border at a river known to the
Greeks as the Kalis and which is known
today as the Kizalermach.
But with Astiagis now toppled, Cryus
believed the former treaty was no longer
in effect.
He now saw his chance to advance beyond
this border and become not just the
richest but also the most powerful man
in the Eastern Mediterranean.
But Cryus was not an impulsive man.
Before any course of action, he did what
any sensible man of this time would do.
He asked the gods.
For this purpose, he sent out messages
to all the oracles of Greece, asking
them whether he should attack the
Persians.
Of all these oracles, the most famous
and widely respected was the oracle at
Delelfi.
The oracle at Delelfi was a woman who
bore the title of Pythia.
For at least 200 years, people had
flocked from all over the Greek world
and beyond to ask the oracle what the
future held.
Once someone came to consult the oracle,
they would be asked to make their
offerings, often a laurel wreath and a
black [music] ram. and then they would
be allowed to ask their question.
The Pythia would then descend into a
stone chamber called the Adaton.
Ancient sources describe this room
filling with vapors and from these
vapors she would enter into a state of
spiritual possession in which the
[music] god Apollo would actually speak
through her often in cryptic riddles.
The Greek writer Strao describes the
effects of these gases.
They say that the seat of the oracle is
a cave that is hollowed out deep down in
the earth with a rather narrow mouth
from which arises breath that inspires a
divine frenzy.
and that over that mouth is placed a
high tripod mounting which the Pythian
priestess receives the breath and then
utters oracles.
The writer Plutarch who served as a
priest of the temple at Delelfi for many
years some centuries later described the
strange smell of these fumes.
Occasionally and fortuitously, the room
in which they seat the god's consultants
is filled with a fragrance and breeze,
as if the aditan were sending forth the
essences of the sweetest and most
expensive perfumes.
The description of this chamber is so
specific and intriguing that
archaeologists have long searched for a
scientific explanation for these fits of
ecstatic possession.
It's been suggested that the area
beneath the Adaton was filled with
smoldering branches of oleander, a
common but extremely poisonous plant
with bright pink flowers that grows
around Greece and Asia Minor.
Eating just one leaf of oleander is
enough to kill a person and inhaling its
smoke can have powerful psychoactive
effects, including hallucinations.
Another suggestion is that the
priestesses were inhaling fumes [music]
that actually emanated from the depths
of the earth itself.
Delelfi sits at a lively geological zone
at a confluence of two major tectonic
fault lines and the limestone beneath it
is high in content of hydrocarbon gases
and among them the psychoactive gas
ethylene.
Ethylene has been used historically as
an anesthetic, but inhaled in small
amounts, it can bring about a conscious
but trlike state, which is said to
include euphoria, outof body
experiences, and in some cases, fits and
convulsions.
The gas also has a sweet smell, which
might explain Plutarch's description of
the chamber's aroma.
Modern analysis has shown that spring
water near the site of the oracle does
contain traces [music] of ethylene and
that at certain fissures in the rock,
the gas may have been released in
sufficient concentrations to account for
the Pythia's visions.
If this is the case, then it's no
surprise [music] that the shrine at
Delelfi had been revered for so many
years as a place where humans could
commune with the voices of the [music]
gods, which seemed to breathe out of the
rocks of the earth itself.
What is certain [music] is that the
Delphic Oracle was revered around all of
Greece, and her word could make or break
the fortunes of even the most powerful
kings.
It was to this priestess that King Cryus
of Lydia sent his messengers as he
[music] considered making war on Cyrus
and the young power of Persia.
These messengers came laden with gifts
that spoke to the enormous wealth
[music] of the kingdom of Lydia. As
Heroditus describes,
he melted down a vast store of gold
[music] and made of it ingots.
[clears throat]
These were 117 in number. He made also
to [music] be made a figure of a lion of
refined gold weighing 10 talents. When
these offerings were fully made, Cus
sent them to Delelfi and [music] other
gifts besides, namely two very great
bowls, one of gold and one of silver.
With their lavish gifts handed over,
Heroditus [music] recounts the message
that the oracle gave to King Cryus.
The Lydians who were to bring these
gifts to the temples were charged by
Criesus to inquire of the oracles. Shall
Criesus send an army against the
Persians? The judgment given to Criesus
by the oracle was that if he should send
an army against the Persians, he would
destroy a great empire.
Boyed up by this seemingly enthusiastic
advice, Cryus immediately readied
himself for war.
In 547 BC, King Cyrus of Persia got news
that Criesus had marched out of his
capital of Sardis and crossed the old
border of the Harles River.
From there, the Lydian forces had swept
into the region of Capidoshia, a
landscape of strange rock formations and
white limestone gullies and rounded on
the regional capital of Terrier. As
Heroditus [music] recounts,
Criesus then passing over his army came
to the part of Capidoshia Culteria where
he encamped and laid waste the farms of
the Syrians. And he took and enslaved
the city of the Terrans, and took also
all the places about it, and drove the
Syrians from their homes, though they
had done him no harm.
When Cyrus heard the news of this Lydian
invasion, it must have troubled him.
He was a new ruler in a warrior culture
that revered strength above all else.
If he failed to meet this challenge, he
could lose the respect of all his
subjects, and his young empire would
fall apart as quickly as it had begun.
He quickly gathered his forces of
combined Persian and Median warriors and
marched out to meet King Cryus in the
shadow of the now ruined city of
Terrier.
Cyrus mustering his army and gathering
to him all those who dwelt upon his way,
went to meet Cryus. When Cyrus had come
and encamped face tof face with Cryus,
the armies made trial of each other's
strength with might. The battle was
stubborn. Many on both sides fell, and
when they were parted at nightfall,
neither had the advantage.
Criesus was clearly surprised by the
strength of Cyrus's response.
Despite the famous Lydian cavalry, the
clash had ended in a stalemate, and now
his invasion had lost all momentum.
To make matters worse, winter was
drawing in.
The mountainous geography of Asia Minor
means its winters can be extremely
punishing with temperatures below
freezing and even dropping to -20° in
extreme conditions.
In that season, snow could sit on the
ground for weeks at a time, and military
campaigns became impossible.
As a result, Cryus decided to retreat
back over the Harles River and return
through the mountains to his capital of
Sardis.
There he would send out requests for
reinforcements from his allies in Egypt
and Babylon, even planning to request
help from the warlike Greek city of
Sparta.
It was in his mind to muster all these
forces and assemble his own army, then
to wait till the winter was over and
march against the Persians at the
beginning of spring. With such intent,
as soon as he returned to Sardis, he
sent heralds to all his [music] allies,
summoning them to assemble at Sardis in
5 months time.
But none of this would come to pass.
That's because Cryus had drastically
underestimated the Persian king Cyrus.
Rather than waiting out the winter as
Cryus had expected, Cyrus took a
remarkable decision.
When Criesus marched away after the
battle, Cyrus took counsel and perceived
thereby that it was his business to
march with all speed against Sardis
before the power of the Lydians could
again be assembled.
He marched his army into Lydia and so
himself came to bring the news of it to
Cesus.
The march would have been a difficult
one.
Ahead of the Persian army lay nearly a
thousand km of rocky mountainous
territory with unfamiliar routes and
narrow passes through the mountains.
Winter was coming, perhaps snow falling.
As such, we can only imagine the
astonishment of King Cryus of Lydia as
he looked out over the walls of his
capital of Sardis and saw the amassed
forces of the Persian army arriving on
the horizon.
Heroditus recalls his shock.
All had turned out contrary to Cryus's
expectation, and he was in a great
quandry. Nevertheless, he led out the
Lydians to battle in the plain, wide and
bare.
As the Persians rode to battle, they
would have been struck by the landscape
they saw ahead of them, dominated by a
remarkable series of monuments. the
burial mounds of Lydia's ancient kings.
For centuries, Lydians had buried their
rulers in vast tombs with bases built of
stepped limestone and marble and great
heaps of earth towering above them.
The largest of these, the mound thought
to have been built for Cryus's father,
Ali, has the same footprint as the
pyramid of Giza and stands to nearly
half its height at 63 m.
littered around the high plain to the
north of Sardis stood around 150 of
these burial mounds. And they would have
made an imposing statement about the
power and prestige of the ancient
kingdom of Lydia.
And up ahead stood the impregnable
citadel of Sardis.
While the main city was defended by a
strong wall, it was the citadel [music]
that made the city virtually impossible
to capture.
It was perched on a knife edge of
limestone jutting out of the plane known
as Mount Tamalus. Its sides so steep
that the fortress barely needed walls in
some places.
Although the Persian army was large,
Cyrus would need every one of his
soldiers to take that fortress, and he
had already seen the damage that the
powerful Lydian cavalry could inflict on
his army.
But he brought a secret weapon to the
battlefield as Heroditus describes.
Assembling all the camels that followed
his army bearing food and baggage. He
took off their burdens and set men upon
them equipped like cavalry men. He
ordered them to advance ahead of his
army against Cryus's horses.
Horses fear camels and can endure
neither the sight nor the smell of them.
So when battle was joined, as soon as
the horses smelt and saw the camels,
they turned to flight and all Creisses
hope was lost.
With their cavalry scattered, the
Lydians retreated to their lofty citadel
and the Persians besieged the
steep-sided fortress.
The siege went on for 14 days, during
which they must have wondered how they
would ever capture it.
But they were about to get a stroke of
luck.
Heroditus recalls that one side of the
city's citadel looked out over a cliff
so sheer that it was comparatively
lightly defended since no one could ever
hope to climb it.
On the eve of the 14th day of the siege,
a soldier in the Persian army spotted a
Lydian warrior climbing down a hidden
route on this side of the fortress.
As he watched, he saw the man climb down
to an outcrop, where he reached down and
picked up his helmet, which had fallen
from the rampart.
No doubt worried that he would be
disciplined by his superiors for losing
his helmet, this Lydian had dared the
deathdeying climb down to retrieve it.
But he had also inadvertently shown the
Persians the way up.
This Martian had seen one of the Lydians
descend by this part of the citadel
after a helmet that had fallen down and
fetch it. He took note of this and
considered it and now he himself climbed
up and other Persians after him. Many
ascended and thus was Sardis taken.
King Criesus of Lydia was captured.
With the fall of Sardis, the entirety of
his powerful kingdom and its vast stores
of gold passed into the hands of the
Persians.
Heroditus [music] ends his story with
the final ironic twist.
So the Persians took Sardis and made
Cusus himself prisoner. He having
reigned [music]
14 years and been besieged 14 days. And
as the oracle foretold,
the empire he brought to [music] an end
was his own.
Heroditus recounts that Cyrus actually
spared Cryus his life [music] and took
him on as an adviser.
While we have no further evidence of
this, it is plausible [music] since we
do have documentary evidence that Cyrus
spared the lives of many of the men he
conquered.
With the kingdom of Lydia and its vast
wealth now absorbed into his growing
empire, Cyrus turned his sights on the
lowlands [music] of Mesopotamia.
where the empire of Babylon now
stretched.
In the years since the fall of the
Assyrian Empire, the Babylonians had
become one of the most powerful empires
in the world, conquering Syria and all
the way down the coast of Palestine to
the borders of Egypt.
But they had experienced some
considerable unrest among their
conquered territories.
Just one example was the incessant
rebellions of the Jewish kingdom of
Judah centered around its ancient
capital of Jerusalem.
The people of Judah had despised the
Assyrian Empire in its day and now hated
the Babylonian Empire that replaced it
just as much.
At the beginning of the 6th century BC,
a number of the Judean cities in the
Levant rebelled against Babylonian rule.
As a result, in 597 BC, King
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon marched west
and besieged the city of Jerusalem.
After a grueling 30month siege, the city
fell and King Nebuchadnezzar sacked it
and burned down the temple that stood on
the temple mount, as the Hebrew book of
Kings recounts.
And it came to pass in the ninth year of
his reign that Nebuchadnezzar, king of
Babylon, came, he and all his army,
against Jerusalem, [music]
and encamped against it. And they built
forts against it round about. And he
burned the house of the Lord, and the
king's house, and all the houses of
Jerusalem. Even every great man's house
burnt he with fire.
The kingdom of Judah was now officially
dissolved.
Large numbers of its people captured
[music] in the sack of Jerusalem were
rounded up and deported to Babylon to be
resettled.
A typical tactic of Mesopotamian [music]
empires when dealing with troublesome
populations.
But despite these troubles in some of
its more restive provinces, the rule of
Nebuchadnezzar [music]
II was prosperous. And it's during his
reign that Babylon built its most famous
[music] landmark, the Ishtar Gate, a
towering edifice faced all over with
brilliant blue glazed bricks, which
opened up onto a grand processional
[music]
street.
Nebuchadnezzar ruled for nearly 60
years. But after his death, the young
empire fell into a period of turmoil.
His son and chosen successor, Amal
Marduk, was apparently incompetent and
ruled for only 2 years before being
overthrown by his brother-in-law.
This man ruled for only four years
before dying and passing the throne to
his son who ruled for only two or three
months before himself being killed and
deposed.
This period of turmoil came to an end
with the reign of a king in Babylon
named Nabonidis.
He stands out in history as a truly
enigmatic figure.
He had no relation to any previous king
and the fact he even became king at all
seems to have come as something of a
[music] surprise to him. As he writes in
one inscription,
"I am Nabonidis, the only son who has
nobody."
In my mind, there was no thought of
kingship.
One strange aspect of Nabonidis is that
he appears to have had somewhat unusual
religious beliefs.
The principal god of Babylon had always
been Marduk, the king of the gods and
lord [music] of the universe.
But Nabonidis was devoted instead to the
moon god sin after apparently seeing him
in a vision.
In fact, carvings of Nabonidis often
show him offering his reverence to the
carved figure of the moon.
This seems to have caused some friction
in the country. As one Babylonian clay
tablet complains,
he made the image of a deity which
nobody had ever seen in this country. He
introduced it into the temple and placed
it upon a pedestal. He called it by the
name of sin. It is adorned with a crown
of lapis lazuli, its appearance that of
the eclipsed moon.
At one point, he seems to have taken a
self-imposed exile from Babylon [music]
lasting 10 years in which he devoted
himself to quiet meditation in the
faraway temple of Tamer in what is today
Saudi Arabia.
This distanced him from his subjects and
disrupted the ceremonial calendar of the
city.
He even failed to show his face at the
annual Babylonian New Year festival
celebrated at the spring equinox.
Usually, the king would climb to the
highest chamber of the city's temple
where the high priest of Marduk would
ceremonially slap him on the face,
reminding him to be humble to the gods.
But Nabonidis, busy worshiping the moon
god far away in Arabia, didn't [music]
attend. As one Babylonian inscription
recounts,
the king was in time while the crown
prince, his officers, and his army were
in Akad. The king did not come to
Babylon in the month Nissanu. The god
Nabu did not come to Babylon. The New
Year's festival did not take place.
We don't know how the war with the
Persians began, but it had clearly begun
to seem inevitable.
Around 540 BC, Nabonidas ordered that
the statues of the gods of each city in
his empire should be transported to
Babylon for safekeeping.
One Babylonian letter from an official
in the city of Uruk describes the
preparations to transport the goddess
Ayana down the river to Babylon on a
raft boyed up by inflated goat skins.
Letter of Rimut to Nabukin Zeri. May
Nabu and Marduk bless my brothers. Send
me one leather mat and five inflated
goat skins for the boat so that the Lady
Eiana may go to Babylon on the
Euphrates.
Other tablets describe the priests
continuing to give offerings of food to
the holy statues as they sailed down the
river on the way to Babylon.
Soon war was declared and Cyrus marched
down into the lowlands of Mesopotamia.
Arriving in the year 539 BC,
King Nabonidas gathered his armies and
set out to meet the invaders at a place
called Opus.
The text known as the Nabonidus
Chronicle recounts in sparse terms what
happened next.
In the month Tashitu, when Cyrus did
battle at Opus on the bank of the Tigris
against the army of Babylon, the people
of Babylon retreated.
He carried off the plunder and
slaughtered the people. On the 14th day,
Cippar was captured without a battle.
Nabonidis fled.
On the 16th day, the army of Cyrus
entered Babylon without a battle.
One Babylonian text written afterwards
on the order of Cyrus is called the
Cyrus cylinder.
In this piece of official propaganda, he
explains that the Babylonian god Marduk
had called on him since King Nabonidis
had so heretically turned his back on
the city's patron deity.
In Nabonidis's mind, reverential fear of
Marduk, king of the gods, had come to an
end. He did yet more evil to his city
every day. He brought ruin on his
people.
Marduk inspected and checked all the
countries seeking for the upright king
of his choice. He took the hand of
Cyrus, king of the city of Anchan, and
called him by his name, proclaiming him
aloud for the kingship over all of
everything. Marduk joyfully looked at
Cyrus's good deeds and at his righteous
heart. He made him take the road to
Babylon and marched at his side like a
friend and companion. Without combat or
battle, he caused him to enter Babylon,
his city. He saved Babylon from
oppression.
The people of Babylon must have feared
the worst when Cyrus's army swept into
the city, but they were pleasantly
surprised.
The Nabonidis chronicle even describes
how Cyrus ordered Persian soldiers to
stand guard outside the great temple to
Marduk called the Asagil to ensure its
protection
until the end of the month. The
shieldbearers of Persia surrounded the
gates of the Asagia.
There was no interruption of whatever
rights in the Asagio and the other
temples and no ritual date was missed.
There was peace in the city when Cyrus
spoke greetings to all of Babylon. The
gods of Aard that Nabonidis had brought
to Babylon returned safely to their cult
places.
All of this signaled that Cyrus wanted
to promote an image of himself as a very
different kind of ruler to those who had
come before.
When he arrived, Cyrus found Babylon
full of captured peoples who had been
seized from their lands in far-flung
provinces [music] and forced to relocate
to the city.
And remarkably, one of his first decrees
as the ruler of Babylon was to allow all
of these peoples, if they wished, to
return home.
These people came from all over the
empire. Elommites and Mes [music] from
the Zagros, Aramaans from Syria,
Phoenicians from cities like Ty and
Sidon, even Egyptians and Arabs. But
most famously, they also came from the
Hebrew kingdom of Judah.
The Hebrew Bible recalls [music] this
event.
Now in the first year of Cyrus, king of
Persia, he made a proclamation
throughout all his kingdom, and put it
also in writing, saying, "Thus saith
Cyrus, king of Persia, the Lord God of
heaven, hath given me all the kingdoms
of the earth. Who is there among you of
all his people? His God be with him, and
let him go up to Jerusalem."
Like the people of Babylon with Marduk,
the Judeans interpreted [music] Cyrus as
having been chosen by their God Yahweh
to set them free.
Cyrus might have calculated that sending
back these few thousand deportes [music]
would improve his reputation around his
new empire. But he couldn't have
predicted quite how long or how far this
act of kindness would be remembered.
Since the Hebrew Bible would form the
basis for the future Christian religion,
his good deed would be immortalized in
the holy text of one of the world's
major religions.
The Hebrew poet prophet we know as
second Isaiah would even go so far as to
name Cyrus with a title that in Hebrew
was pronounced Mashiach, which meant the
anointed one of God. A title which gives
us the English word [music] Messiah.
>> This is what the Lord says to Cyrus, his
Messiah, whose right hand he will
empower.
Before him, mighty kings will be
paralyzed with fear. Their fortress
gates will be opened, never to shut
again.
Cyrus would be the first and only
non-Jewish person to ever be awarded
that title, a testament to his skill at
winning people over.
Meanwhile, the name Babylon would pass
into memory as a byword for oppression,
slavery, and corruption.
A reminder that our actions in history
can resonate far longer than we might
ever expect.
The empire that Cyrus forged, the
Persians would refer to as Kashathra,
meaning simply the kingdom. And it would
always be a cultural melting pot.
The Persians themselves had begun as a
successful marriage of Iranian and
Elomite cultures. But over the decades
and centuries that followed, they would
add elements of Mesopotamian dress,
religion, art, and iconography.
They also introduced ideas in
architecture, medicine, and engineering
from conquered regions like Lydia, the
Greek cities of Asia Minor, Egypt, and
Phoenicia.
Heroditus describes this Persian ability
to synthesize the ways of others.
>> No race is so ready to adopt foreign
ways as the Persian. For instance, they
wear the Medidian costume as they think
it handsomemer than their own, and their
soldiers wear the Egyptian armor.
Persia was an empire that combined and
reproduced the best ideas from each
culture it absorbed and in that way it
was remarkably successful.
For the Greek writers who encountered
Persians [music] and described them, one
of the most remarkable aspects of their
appearance was [music] their clothing as
Heroditus describes.
Around their heads they wore something
[music] called a tiara of soft felt
while on their body they wore a
multicolored sleeved garment and a piece
of armor in appearance like fish scales
made of iron.
Around their legs they wore trousers.
Trousers were an innovation developed on
the Eurasian step, designed to protect
the legs while riding a horse night and
day. In the years after the conquest of
Babylon, the Persians would combine
these with fine fabrics and expensive
[music] dyes to create new stylish
garments.
The Greek writer Zenapon describes the
appearance of a Persian prince.
Upon a chariot he appeared in the gates,
wearing his tiara upright, a purple
tunic shot with white, trousers of
scarlet dye about his legs, and a mantle
all of purple.
Greeks had for centuries worn simple
tunics and [music] cloaks and always
left their legs bare.
They found the appearance of Persian
trousers ridiculous and mocked their
baggy appearance using the slang word
thulaoy, a word which means sachs.
In fact, if an ancient Greek were
somehow transported into the modern day,
perhaps the first thing they would be
struck by was how everyone around them
[music] was dressed like a Persian.
Apart from their clothes, Persians also
looked physically different to the Greek
writers who documented them.
When they captured Persian [music]
prisoners of war, ancient writers
expressed surprise at how white their
skins were compared to the sunburned
Greeks and considered this a sign of
their softness and effeminacy.
When the Greeks depicted Persians in
their art, their beards are always shown
to be big and bushy with long mustaches.
And we also see the importance of beards
in Persian culture reflected in the
carved palace reliefs at Pipilus.
In these images, the men with the
highest status are always shown to have
the most formidable beards.
Religion
in the empire was complex and diverse,
and it's not actually known for sure
what religious beliefs early rulers like
Cyrus would have held.
But they were likely followers of an
early form of Iranian religion and what
would later become Zoroastrianism.
[music]
The Zoroastrian faith was founded by a
prophet named Zarathustra who likely
lived somewhere in [music] the eastern
regions of the Iranian world, perhaps in
modern Afghanistan or Tajikistan.
He was born sometime around the year
1,000 BC, likely into a nomadic or
semi-nomadic people.
At the age of 30, while attending his
people's [music] annual spring festival,
Zerahustra saw a vision in which a
shining being appeared to him and taught
him about the god called [music] Ahura
Mazda or wise lord.
This shining being [music] also told him
about an evil entity known as Angramanu
or the destructive spirit.
For all of time, Ahura Mazda and [music]
Angramanu had been locked in an eternal
battle in which the forces of Asha or
order were pitted against the evil
forces of Duj or deception.
After this vision, Zarathustra decided
to devote his life to promoting the good
force of Asha and spreading the word of
the wise god Ahuram Mazda.
His life teachings would be collected in
a series of texts known as the [music]
Gthas, the divine songs which forms part
of the Zoroastrian religious text, the
Avesta.
Fundamentally, Zarathustra taught that a
person's thoughts, words, and [music]
actions formed an unbroken chain.
If you strived to think only good
thoughts, then you would speak only good
words and then commit only good actions.
As the following Zoroastrian prayer song
describes, [music]
>> [singing]
>> With outspread hands in petition for
that help, O Mazda, I will pray for the
works of the Holy Spirit, oh thou the
right, whereby I may please the will of
good thought,
the wise whom thou knowest as worthy,
for their good deeds and their good
thought. For them do thou fulfill their
longing.
Part of the attainment of good thought
and good words was an uncompromising
adherence to speaking the truth.
Something that Persians took extremely
seriously.
Heroditus describes witnessing this
firsthand.
>> They consider telling lies more
disgraceful than anything else. And next
to that, owing money. There are many
reasons for their horror of debt. But
the chief of their conviction is that a
man who owes money is bound also to tell
lies.
Zoroastrians particularly held earth,
fire, and water to be sacred and agents
of purifying.
Zoroastrian temples had at their heart
an eternal flame that was supposed to
never be put out. The priests of the
temple would wear face masks over their
mouths so that their unclean breath
would not pollute the sacred fire.
Persians also held rivers and other
bodies of water to be sacred as
Heroditus describes.
The following are certain Persian
customs which I can describe from
personal knowledge.
The erection of statues and altars is
not an acceptable practice amongst them
and anyone who does such a thing is
considered a fool.
God in their system is the whole circle
of the heavens and they sacrifice to him
from the tops of mountains. They also
worship the sun, moon and earth, fire,
water and winds which are their only
original deities. They have a profound
reverence for rivers. They will never
pollute a river with urine or spittle or
even wash their hands in one or allow
anyone else to do so.
The inscriptions of the Persians
continually reference the god Ahuram
Mazda. But the Persian court also held
reverence for other gods like the
warrior goddess Anahita, an Elomite
[music] god named Human, and Mithra, god
of the sun, guardian of cattle, the
harvest, and the waters.
Perhaps partly as a result of their
religious conviction, the Persians were
also prolific gardeners.
While we can't reconstruct the true
shape of aid religion, later
Zoroastrians held that the dry and
desert parts of the world were made
barren by the destructive and deceptive
[music] spirit Angrau.
Meanwhile, the spirit of the good Ahura
Mazda gave them the task of turning the
deserts of the world green.
What we know for sure is that wherever
they [music] went, the Persians
cultivated ornamental gardens. These
gardens, they gave a name that suggested
[music] exclusivity and security. from
the Persian words py and dyer meaning
walled or [music] bricked around.
Parida,
the name for these gardens passed into
Greek [music] as paradisos, which gives
us the English word paradise.
These places particularly impressed
Greek travelers to Persia since the
Greeks at that time had no culture of
ornamental gardens. In his rhetorical
work economicus, the Greek writer
[music] Zenapon describes with awe the
flourishing paradites that the Persians
built in the Lydian capital of Sardis,
which he witnessed with his own eyes.
He was astonished at the beauty of the
trees within, all planted at equal
intervals, the long straight rows of
waving branches, the perfect regularity,
the rectangular symmetry of the hole,
and the many sweet scents which hung
about them as they paced the park.
These gardens also impressed [music]
Hebrew writers who adopted the word
pares into Hebrew to describe an
orchard.
And they may have used these [music]
gardens as a model for the walled garden
of Eden in the book of Genesis which is
thought to have been written [music]
down in its final form during the
Persian period.
Since earth and water were both
considered sacred elements in Iranian
religion, it was considered blasphemy to
pollute them with the remains of the
dead. Instead, the bodies of those
deceased were taken into high structures
built on the tops of hills or mountains.
Today these have become known as the
towers of silence presided over by
Zoroastrian priests known as magi.
Here the bodies were laid out and left
for the birds to pick apart and then the
bones were bleached by the sun and wind.
Heroditus describes this practice with
some distaste.
So much I can say of them from my own
certain knowledge, but there are other
matters concerning the dead, which are
secretly and obscurely told. How the
dead bodies of Persians are not buried
before they have been mangled by birds
or dogs, that this is the way of the
magi, I know for certain, for they do
not conceal the practice.
It's not known exactly how widespread
this practice was during the Persian
period and it was never used for rulers.
Later amenid kings were buried in rock
cut tombs usually in the sides of a
cliff at a place called Nakostam
a few kilometers northwest of Pepilus.
There, the stone walls and floors of
their chambers kept the bodies from
making contact with the sacred earth
beneath them, and as an added benefit,
were visible in the distance from the
great city, a potent reminder of the
kings that had come before.
Greeks like Heroditus [music]
were also beused by the Persians custom
of each year celebrating the day of
someone's birth.
Of all days in the year, a Persian most
distinguishes his birthday and
celebrates it with a dinner of special
magnificence. A rich Persian on his
birthday will have an ox or a horse or a
camel or a donkey baked whole in the
oven and served up at the table. and the
poor some smaller beast.
>> At these celebrations, it's likely that
a great amount of wine would have
flowed.
The nomadic ancestors of the Persians
had likely drunk out of cups made of
hollowedout cow horns, but the Persians
had long since replaced bone for silver
and gold.
Now they drank out of vessels called
[music] rons that were still shaped like
animal horns but could be wrought in
ornate patterns in precious metals.
Wine was produced in the upland regions
of Persia in the area of modern Shiraz
and imported from vineyards in Syria and
elsewhere.
Persians not only enjoyed wine for its
pleasurable effects, but believed it
could actually help them consider the
world from a different angle. As
Herodotus describes,
they are very fond of wine. If an
important decision is to be made, they
discuss [music] the question when they
are drunk. And the following day, the
master of the house where the discussion
was held submits their decision for
reconsideration when they are sober. If
they still approve it, it is [music]
adopted. If not, it is abandoned.
Conversely, any decision they make when
they are sober [music]
is reconsidered afterwards when they are
drunk.
However, despite their love of the good
things in life, Persians were still
governed by strict rules about behavior
in [music] public, as Zenapon recounts.
There remains, even under this day,
evidence of their moderate fair. For
even to the present time, it is a breach
of decorum for a Persian to spit or to
blow his nose. It is a breach of decorum
also to be seen going apart either to
make water or for anything else of that
kind. And this would not be possible for
them if they did not lead an abstious
life.
With his vast empire conquered and his
rule steadily solidifying across his
domain, Cyrus settled down and began to
build a grand palace complex, which he
would name his capital.
He elected to build this at the location
of his decisive final battle against the
Mes at a place called Pasagada.
Archaeology has shown that the palace
that Cyrus built would be of a strange
and unprecedented design. A garden city
dotted with pavilions and palace
structures made of stone and decorated
in marble.
In this way, it actually mirrored the
structure of a nomadic camp stretched
out over the plane, but with stone
structures [music] instead of tents.
It was a clear architectural nod to the
nomadic roots of the Persian people and
perhaps the kind of [music] habitation
in which Cyrus himself felt the most
comfortable, surrounded by nature.
The defining feature of this palace
would be its garden, a masterpiece of a
Persian parida.
Modern pollen analysis has shown that
trees like cyprress and hazelnut,
[music]
oak, elm, and pistachio were cultivated
here. Fed by water channels cut [music]
from dressed stone, this paradise would
have blossomed even on this high arid
plateau in the [music] middle of Persia.
The garden was divided into four parts.
And it's thought that this was designed
to evoke the same [music] phrase that
Cyrus would use again and again whenever
he described himself in his
inscriptions.
>> I am Cyrus,
king of the four quarters of the world.
This quartered [music] design would
become integral to the design of Persian
gardens around the world which followed
the style known as chaharb bag or
fourpart gardens.
In later centuries [music]
these would be found across a vast
stretch of the earth from the gardens of
[music] sevil in southern Spain to those
of northern India and the Taj Mahal.
But it's a design that began here in the
gardens of Cyrus the Great.
Construction on the palace of Pasagai
began in 546 BC and would continue for
the next 16 years.
But it would be brought to a sudden end
by an event that must have sent shock
waves around the Persian Empire and
beyond.
That was the death in the year 530 of
the king of kings, king of the four
quarters of the world, Cyrus the Great.
Just as with his birth, there are many
stories told of how Cyrus the Great met
his end.
and many of them have the hallmarks of
mythology.
What we know with some certainty is that
Cyrus had decided to expand his empire
into the northeast in the great plain
that stretches out between the Caspian
and Aral seas.
Much of the eastern half of the Persian
Empire was unknown to the Greeks and so
our history of it is largely blank.
From the perspective of written history,
the eastern side of the empire is like
the dark side of the moon, a place
always in shadow.
But according to Heroditus, this region
was home to a warlike people known as
the Masagatai.
The people Herodas called [music] the
Masakatai likely called themselves
something like the Masyakata,
meaning the fish eating people, since
they made their livelihood fishing in
the Caspian Sea.
Heroditus describes their simple way of
life.
These are said to be a great people and
mighty dwelling towards the east and the
sunrise where men are said to live whose
food is raw fish and their customary
dress seal skins.
The masagatai also seem to have used
some kind of drug, possibly cannabis,
during their ceremonies and
celebrations, as Heroditus recounts.
assembling in companies and kindling a
fire. The people sit around it and throw
a plant into the flames. Then the smell
of it as it burns makes them drunk as
the Greeks are with wine, and more and
more drunk as more is thrown on the
fire, till at last they rise up and
dance and even sing. Such is said to be
their way of life.
Perhaps realizing the dangerous nature
of the campaign he was embarking on,
Cyrus made sure to settle the matter of
his succession before he set out.
He named his son Kambisces as his
successor and also made him regent of
the empire in his absence.
He also had a younger son Bardia and to
this man he gave a large and wealthy
area in the east which he also exempted
from taxes.
It was a clear sign that he hoped his
sons would manage to live in peace once
he was no longer around.
According to Heroditus, the ruler of the
Masagatai was a queen named Tomirus.
Now, at this time, the Mesageti were
ruled by a queen called Tomius, whose
husband was dead. Sirrus sent a message
with a pretense of wooing her for his
wife. But Tomius would have none of his
advance, well understanding that he
wooed not her but her kingdom.
After this peaceful approach failed,
Heroditus claims that Cyrus lay an
ambush at a feast in which he served
strong wine to a group of Masagatai
noblemen, among them the son of the
queen Tomius.
These nomadic men, unus to strong wine,
were soon roaring drunk, and in this
[music] helpless state, Cyrus's men fell
on them and killed them all. After this
deceitful [music]
act, the heartbroken Tamius rallied her
forces and rode out to crush Cyrus with
the rage of a grieving mother.
There perished the greater part of the
Persian army, and there fell Cyrus
himself. Tomius filled a skin with human
blood and sought for Cyrus's body among
the Persian dead. When she found it, she
put his head into the skin and spoke
these words of insult to the dead man.
Even as I threatened, so will I do and
give thee thy fill of blood.
Exciting and poetic as it is, this
stirring tale of treachery and revenge
is likely a folk tale. Heroditus himself
points out that even at the time
multiple versions of the great man's
death were already circulating.
Many stories are related to Cyrus's
death. This that I have told is the
worthiest of credence.
In contrast, the Greek writer Zenapon
has Cyrus die peacefully in bed,
surrounded by his sons.
The Greek Tissus, [music] who lived in
Persia, describes him being wounded in
battle against the Cythians, but coming
home to his palace at Pasagadi, where he
later died of his wounds.
Ultimately, we can never know the truth,
which must lie somewhere between [music]
these accounts.
What we know is that in the year 530 BC,
Cyrus the Great died, likely on campaign
in [music] the east.
He would be buried in a modest tomb at
his palace of Pasagadi, a monument that
combines some elements of the mound
tombs of Lydia that he had seen on his
march to Sardis all those years before
and others based on the stepped design
of a Mesopotamian or Elomite ziggurat.
The stone base raising him above the
sacred earth in accordance with Iranian
[music] tradition.
The Greek traveler Arian passed through
the region some centuries later and
wrote one description of the tomb's
remaining finery.
The tomb of the famous Cyrus was in the
royal park at Paga Day and around it a
grove of all kinds of trees had been
planted. The park was also watered by a
stream and high grass grew in the
meadow.
In the building lay a golden coffin in
which the body of Cyrus had been buried.
A carpet of Babylonian tapestry with
purple rugs formed the bedding. Upon it
were also a median coat with sleeves and
other tunics.
Perhaps since Iranians before that point
[music] typically didn't use gravestones
or monuments for their burials, there is
a distinctly defensive tone to the
inscription reportedly carved over the
tomb.
Upon the tomb, an inscription in Persian
letters had been placed which bore the
following meaning in the Persian
language.
Oh man, I am Cyrus, son of Cambes,
[music] who founded the empire of the
Persians and was king of Asia. Do not
therefore grudge me this monument.
With the death of Cyrus, his son
Kambisces ascended to the throne.
Kambisces's name in old Persian was
Kambujia.
He was the son and heir of a king who
had started with virtually nothing. The
ruler of a small tribe and with cunning
tactical genius and [music] political
acumen had carved out the world's
largest empire in only three decades and
brought [music] countless people under
his banner.
The expectation on this prince must have
been immense.
But unfortunately he would not live up
to the promise of his father.
There seems to have been some question
over the abilities of Kambises from the
very start.
In 538 BC his father had named him
governor of Babylon and its surrounding
areas. But he was removed from that
position after only 9 months.
The reason for this is unclear, but we
might take it as a warning sign that all
would not be well when this young prince
took the throne.
According to the account of Heroditus,
one of his first acts was to have his
brother Bardia secretly killed, ensuring
that no rival to his rule remained
alive.
To do this job, he enlisted the help of
a priest or magi named Galata.
Kambises, as the Egyptians say, became
absolutely mad. And the first of his
evil deeds was that he put to death his
brother, Bardia, who was of the same
father and the same mother as himself.
Some say that he took him out to hunt
and there slew him. others that he
brought him to the Eriithan Sea and
drowned him.
When this magi Gmata sent him word that
his brother was dead and his reign
secure, Kambisces set his sights on
further territorial expansion and the
one great prize that would outdo the
conquests of his esteemed father, the
ancient and wealthy kingdom of Egypt.
Egypt at this time was undergoing
something of a renaissance.
Under the long 44year rule of its
pharaoh, Akmosa II, the lands of the
Nile Valley had prospered and regained
some of the glory that had characterized
its golden ages of the old, middle,
[music] and new kingdoms.
But in 526 BC, this great pharaoh died,
and the rule of Egypt passed on to his
son, a man named Samic III.
Kambises, perhaps knowing all too well
the pressure of trying to live up to a
high achieving father, immediately
prepared to invade the lands of Egypt.
The very next year, in the spring of 525
BC, Kambisces set out.
To help him on his campaign, he
recruited an enormous force drawn from
all corners of the empire.
A Persian army of this time was made up
of a patchwork of different units who
each fought in the traditional manner of
their homeland.
There were long speared cavalry from
Lydia, shielded spearmen from Babylonia,
archers from the Mes and Elommites.
He also recruited skilled sailors from
the Phoenician cities on the Palestinian
coast along with their swift ships and
heavily armored Greek hoplights from the
Ionian cities of Asia.
These Greek warriors would become known
as the bronze men from the sea since
they had trained to fight with heavy
armor covering most of their bodies.
With this force of perhaps 50,000
soldiers, Kambisces set out to Egypt,
sending half by land and half by sea on
the Phoenician ships and met at [music]
the port town of Palusium, the gateway
to the Nile Delta.
At Palusium, sources indicate that the
Pharaoh of Egypt had sent a man named
Wedger Horesnet to command much of the
Egyptian fleet with orders to repel the
advancing army of the Persians.
But this man, for unknown reasons,
decided to defect.
Whether bribed or threatened, when
Kambises arrived, Wedger Horasnet turned
his ships over to the Persian army and
swore allegiance to Kambisces.
Now without a navy and cut off on the
waterways of the Nile Delta, the
Egyptian army was swiftly surrounded and
defeated.
Wedger Horessnet was suitably rewarded
for his part in the battle.
One inscribed statue now kept in the
Vatican describes the strange trajectory
of his life and perhaps gives some sense
of why he refused to fight the Persians.
The great king of all foreign lands,
Kisces, came to Egypt, bringing the
foreigners of every foreign country with
him. When he had taken possession of the
entire country, and he was made great
sovereign of Egypt, his majesty
appointed me his chief physician. I
protected the inhabitants from the very
large troubles which had come from all
over the whole country, and I defended
the meek against the powerful.
I saved those who were afraid.
Kambises was crowned as the pharaoh of
Egypt in August 525 BC only a few months
after setting out on campaign in the
city of Sis in the western Nile Delta.
There he was awarded the pent, the
double crown that combined the white
bulbous crown of upper Egypt with the
red crown of lower Egypt, a symbol that
had been worn by Egyptian pharaohs for
more than 2 and a half thousand years.
But if Heroditus is to be believed,
Kambisces didn't share his father's
diplomatic streak.
When he captured the pharaoh sic, he
seems to have enjoyed humiliating him
with a cruel spectacle.
On the 10th day after the surrender of
the walled city of Memphis, Kambises
took Samic, king of Egypt, who had
reigned for 6 months, and confined him
in the outer part of the city with other
Egyptians to insult him.
He dressed the daughter of the king as a
slave and sent her out with a pitcher to
fetch water together with other girls
from the families of the leading men. So
when the girls went out before their
father's eyes, crying and lamenting, all
the rest answered with cries and
weeping, seeing their children abused.
But Samic only bowed himself to the
ground.
Next, the [music] king's son was paraded
before him in chains to be led to his
death.
But once again, the king did not cry.
It was only when he saw an old servant
of his walking among the crowd that his
mask cracked.
After these two had gone, it happened
that there was one of his companions, a
man passed his prime, who had lost all
his possessions and begged of the army.
This man now went out before Pharaoh,
Samik, and the Egyptians. When Samic saw
him, he broke into loud weeping,
striking his head and calling on his
companion by name.
In Heroditus, Kambisces comes across as
a sadist and a tyrant. He describes him
brutally suppressing the religion of
Egypt, destroying temples as a
punishment for rebellions, flogging
priests, and even killing the sacred
Apis Bull, a beloved and holy animal in
the city of Memphis, believed to be the
living offspring of the god Hatheror.
But actual Egyptian sources undermine
this view.
They show that Kambisces worked hard to
ingratiate himself with his Egyptian
subjects.
Far from murdering an apis bull, he
actually attended the funeral services
when one of these bulls died, and no
Egyptian sources mention its murder.
But the very existence of these stories
still circulating in Egypt about 80
years later when Heroditus passed
through shows us that Kambises was
unpopular.
He appears to have attempted to reform
the Egyptian tax system so that citizens
no longer paid their taxes to the
temples, something that would have
enraged the ancient and powerful
priestly class.
While Cyrus had skillfully absorbed
people into the empire by listening to
what they wanted and ensuring he gave it
to them, his son Kisces tried to meddle
in local affairs and alienated his
people.
Whether Egypt would have eventually
erupted in rebellion against Kambises,
we will never know.
That's because in 522 BC, only 4 years
into his rule as pharaoh, Kambisces got
some remarkable and extremely disturbing
news.
Back in Babylon, a man had shown up
claiming to be his younger brother,
Bardia. And this man had declared
himself king of Persia.
In the version of this story that
Heroditus gives us, Kambisces had
already secretly killed his younger
brother Bardia.
For this reason, he immediately realized
that this Bardia must be an impostor.
And the only person it could be is the
only other person who knew that Bardia
was dead, the magi named Galata.
Realizing that he might be about to lose
his kingdom, Kambises leapt onto his
horse and set out to fight this
impostor.
But he would never reach the
battlefield. As Herodotus describes,
>> having wept his fill in great grief for
all his mishap, he leapt upon his horse
with intent to march forth wits to Souza
against the magi.
As he mounted, the scavered knob of his
sword slipped off, and the naked blade
struck his thigh, wounding him. After
this, the bone became gang greened and
the thigh rotted, which took off
Cambisis, son of Cyrus, who had reigned
in all seven years and 5 months, and
left no sons or daughters at all.
This was an unbelievable situation.
With Kambises dead, the impostor Bardia
now ruled the empire.
This man, by a grand coincidence,
happened to be the spitting image of the
disappeared prince. A likeness so
perfect that all but one of Bardia's
wives failed to notice the difference
between them.
This wife, a woman named Fadime, alerted
some members of the court. A gasast that
an impostor was sitting on the throne,
these six men began a plot to overthrow
the false king.
To help them in their plan, they
recruited the help of a faithful general
of the dead kingises
and a distant member of the royal
family, a man who in old Persian was
named Dari Vos.
His name would be rendered into Greek as
Darius.
Now came to Souza, Darius, son of High
Staspes, from Persia. And on his coming,
the six Persians resolved to make Darius
2 their comrade. The seven then met and
gave each other pledges and spoke
together.
Darius and his co-conspirators chose
their moment, then struck.
They drew their daggers and burst into
the false king's apartment while he
slept, managing to overpower his
bodyguards.
Finally, the conspirators found
themselves in a bitter hand-to-hand
struggle, which Herodus renders in
thrilling fashion.
Two of the seven, Darius and Gobrias,
hurled themselves into the chamber with
him. Gobrias and the magi grappled
together, while Darius stood perplexed
in the darkness, fearing to strike.
Gobias seeing Darius stand idle cried to
know why he did not strike. For fear of
stabbing you quot Darius. Nay said
Gobrias thrust with your sword though it
be through both of us. So Darius thrust
with his dagger and by good luck it was
the magi that he stabbed.
The imposter king lay dead and in the
aftermath of this assassination the
plotters swept in to consolidate their
power.
Finally, as the dust of the coup
settled, Darius was made king and the
line of Cyrus the Great was saved.
This official version of events would be
immortalized not only by Heroditus but
also chiseled into the limestone face of
a cliff on Mount Bisset 100 meters above
the ground and visible for all to see on
the road from Ebatina to Babylon.
In this Bissetun inscription, Darius
recounts the exact story that Heroditus
does of Kambises killing his brother in
secret and the impostor Bardia taking
the throne.
A son of Cyrus named Kambises, one of
our dynasty was king here before me.
That Kisces had a brother, Bardia by
name, and Kambises slew this Bardia.
There was a certain man, a magi, Galata
by name, who raised a rebellion, saying,
"I am Bardia, the son of Cyrus, the
brother of Kisces. He seized the
kingdom. The people feared him
exceedingly, for he slew many who had
known the real Bardia so that no one
would recognize him.
The inscription is accompanied by a
carving showing Darius with one foot
placed on the fallen body of the magi
Gal Mata
beside which Darius recounts in his own
words the plot to overthrow and murder
murder the impostor king.
>> There was none who dared to act against
Gow the magi [clears throat]
until I came. Then I prayed to Ahura
Mazda. Ahura master brought me help. On
the 10th day of the month, with a few
men, I slew that Gowmata the Magi. I
dispossessed him of the kingdom.
[clears throat]
>> By the grace of the Ahura Mazda, I
became king.
>> [clears throat]
>> This remarkable story is so outlandish
that many modern historians actually
[music] don't believe it at all. They
propose an alternate version of events.
But this other version is in some ways
just as incredible.
It's now thought that [music] the man
who rose up in rebellion against
Kambisces was actually his younger
brother Bardia and that everything that
makes up the core of Herodotus' account
and the Bisset [music] inscription was
an audacious ruse by the man who had
ultimately seized the throne, the
usurper king Darius.
We can never know whether all the
conspirators were in on the lie or
whether Darius had actually convinced
them that Bardia was an impostor.
Either way, the official propaganda of
Darius's new regime clearly won the day.
Now inscribed in stone at Mount Bisset
and clearly circulating among the
[music] people to such an extent that
they would recount it to Heroditus
generations later. The story of the
imposttor Bardia had now for all intents
and purposes [music]
become the truth.
Darius was now the new king of kings,
king of the four quarters [music] of the
world.
It's clear from the Bissetun inscription
that from the moment Darius seized
power, he faced an understandable crisis
of legitimacy.
He was not the direct descendant of
Cyrus the Great, but claimed to be a
distant cousin of the great empire
builder.
In a culture completely dominated by the
idea of telling the truth, the creeping
suspicion that the new king might have
lied his way to the throne must have
eroded many people's faith in his rule.
Perhaps as a result, more imposters were
now popping up all over the land as the
Bissetun inscription recounts.
After I had slain Ga the Magi, a certain
man [clears throat] named Asha raised a
rebellion in Ilam, and he spoke thus
unto the people of Ilam. I am king in
Ilam. Thereupon [snorts]
the people of Elam became rebellious and
a certain Babylonian named Nadinubel
raised a rebellion in Babylon. He lied
to the people saying I am Nebuchadnezzar
the son of Nabonidis
aitria.
Whether these people were actually lying
about their identities or whether Darius
was now calling all of his enemies
imposters, we can never know. But while
he set out to crush these rebellions,
more broke out in virtually every corner
of the empire.
>> While I was in Babylon, these provinces
revolted from me. Persia, Elam, Media,
Assyria, Egypt, Paththeia, Margana,
Satagidia, and
>> Cyia,
Margush, Tatagouch, Saka.
>> At least one of these rebel leaders also
claimed to be Darius's missing brother,
Bardia. Something that must have thrown
up even more confusion.
It was a time when people's shared
reality was becoming completely
untethered and now no one knew who the
rightful king was.
For a time it must have looked like the
vast empire was about to collapse
entirely.
But this was not to be the case.
That's because Darius seems to have been
an exceptionally talented [music]
general and gathered a number of capable
allies among the Mes, Persians, and
[music] Armenians.
These loyal generals swept around the
empire, putting down one rebellion after
another and crucifying each of their
leaders in cruel public displays of
brutality.
In just his first year of rule, Darius
claimed to have put down no fewer than
19 rebellions.
This is what I have done. By the grace
of Ahura Mazda, have I always acted.
After I became king, I fought 19 battles
in a single year. And by the grace of
Ahura Mazda, I overthrew nine kings and
I made them captive.
As to these provinces which revolted,
lies made them revolt so that they
deceived the people.
King Darius says, "You who shall be king
hereafter,
protect yourself vigorously from lies
and punish the liars well. Then may your
country be secure.
To address his crisis of legitimacy,
Darius set about marrying every
available woman he could find descended
from the family of Cyrus the Great,
including two of Cyrus's daughters.
In this way, he interjected himself and
his sons into the line of succession and
silenced his critics.
Darius even went so far as to create a
legendary common ancestor who he gave
the name Hahamanish.
This figure would be called Akees by the
Greeks. And it's by this name that the
bloodline of Cyrus is often called
today, the Akeminids, even though Cyrus
himself never mentioned the name in his
inscriptions.
To make this deception complete, Darius
even sent stonemasons to Cyrus's palace
at Pasagadi in a shameless attempt to
rewrite history and link the great king
with his own line.
These men carved a simple message into
the stone pillars in the voice of the
previous king.
Adam Kurushia.
>> I am Cyrus the king an aimed.
The only thing that gives the game away
to modern archaeologists is that this
message was carved in a type of
kuneaoiform alphabet that would not be
in use until the reign of Darius since
in other inscriptions Darius boasts
about introducing it. For this reason,
most historians believe that it was not
written by Cyrus.
Eventually, after 3 years of near
ceaseless fighting, the rebellions
burned themselves [music] out like
wildfires running out of dry brush. And
Darius was able to settle down into a
relatively stable rule.
And from that rocky start, Darius
underwent a campaign of expansion,
especially in the east.
Conquest of parts of India had begun
under Cyrus the Great, but Darius pushed
the empire's boundaries right up to the
area of the Punjab in northern India,
conquering virtually all of what is
[music] today Pakistan.
Although sources on this side of the
empire are scant, it's worth remembering
that the Persian Empire was a territory
that straddled worlds. From the humid
riverlands of India to the Eurasian step
in the north, the Indian Ocean to the
south, and Europe, North Africa, and the
Mediterranean in the west.
Darius now ruled over a land area of 5.5
million square kilm larger than the
Roman Empire at its height and with an
estimated population of as many as 20
million people with a world population
at the time of little more than 100
million. This means that as much as 20%
of the world's population now lived
[music] in Darius's Persian Empire.
But throughout the years of rebellion,
Darius had seen just how fragile [music]
the empire could be.
He was determined to bring about a
number of reforms designed to [music]
strengthen it and turn it into a power
that could last.
To help him with the administration of
this unwieldy territory, Darius
reorganized [music] the empire, dividing
it into 20 regions over which governors
ruled.
These governors were called Kashra
Pavaravan, which would enter Greek as
the word Satrap.
These regions would thus become known as
Satropes.
Darius also issued a standard currency
based on gold and silver coins called
Dar, mostly used in the Western Empire.
These were stamped with an image of a
king holding a bow and would soon be
found all around the ancient world.
He also standardized a system of weights
and measures allowing for a level of
coordination in the Aminid economy.
The economy is actually one of the few
areas where the Persians themselves are
able to speak in the light of history
and that is due to one remarkable find
that occurred in 1933.
In that year, archaeologists excavating
the ruined palaces of Pepilus [music]
uncovered two small chambers within a
bastion along the fortification wall at
the edge of the great stone terrace.
There they discovered a vast cache of
tens of thousands of clay [music]
tablets and fragments.
These texts which today are known as the
Pepilus fortification tablets offer a
rare glimpse [music] into the workings
of the Akeminid administrative system.
They are written almost exclusively
[music] in Elomite. But some also appear
in Fragian, Aramaic, Old Persian and
even Greek and record [music] the
collection, transfer and storage of
goods in the region around Pipilus,
controlling the movements of grain and
fruit, sheep, goats, cattle and poultry,
as well as flour, bread, beer, wine,
fruits, oil, meat and animal hides.
These resources were distributed to
temples, members of the royal family,
courtiers, priests, religious officials,
administrators, travelers, [music]
laborers, and artisans.
The following tablet written in Elomite
shows the transfer of barley in the year
501 BC.
130 L of barley from the possessions of
Amma Verta have been received by Barik
El as his rations given in the town of
Athema in the 21st year in the month
Shabbah.
Other tablets describe payments in
silver made to important officials
to Shaka the treasurer. But Karma
declares that Herd Karma the Egyptian
was the chief of a team of 100 laborers
and is entitled to three kasha and two
and a half shekels of silver as his
wage.
The historian Lloyd Llewellyn Jones
describes this administrative regime.
Nothing was too trivial to be logged.
The number of nails needed to repair a
wooden boat in upper Egypt or the fact
that a plague of locusts meant that a
mud brick wall could not be built in
Bactrea. Each and every case was
individually recorded, signed off,
[snorts] reported to the central
administration in Persia, and
methodically filed away.
At the old Elomite capital of Susa,
Darius would construct a palace that for
much of the empire's history would act
as the buzzing hive mind of this
administration.
Souza was well connected by road to all
parts of the empire and also by a canal
that linked it to the Euphrates River
and from there the Persian Gulf.
As a result, at Souza, messengers would
come and go, day in and day out, bearing
tablets and missives, keeping this
machinery moving and the resources of
the empire flowing out to its people.
As a testament to his vision of an
empire that brought peoples together,
this palace would form an architectural
representation of everything the empire
had achieved. As Darius describes in one
inscription,
>> yaka timber was brought from Gandara and
from Carmania. The gold was brought from
Sardis and from Bactria. The precious
stone, Lapitz, Lazuli and Carnelon was
brought from Sdiana. The stone cutters
who wrought the stone were Ionians and
Sardians. The goldsmiths were Mes and
Egyptians. The men who wrought the wood
were Sardinians and Egyptians. The men
who wrought the baked brick were
Babylonians. The men who adorned the
wall, those were Mes and Egyptians.
Darius also commissioned a new palace
that would be built at the site of
Pepilolis,
lined with a series of beautiful reliefs
that formed an artistic representation
of his vision, showing scenes of all the
different peoples of the empire wearing
their distinctive dress, all coming to
bring tribute to the King of Kings.
Partly due to their roots in nomadic
culture, the Persian royal court was
mobile and under Darius they traveled
between royal centers throughout the
year.
During the sweltering summer months, the
king and his entourage, unics, [music]
servants, bodyguards, children, and the
palace women moved up into the mountains
to the summer capital of Ekbata.
But when the cold winters brought snow
to the hills, the court would move to
the lowlands in the foothills of the
Zagros [music] Mountains and the buzzing
nerve center of Susa.
spring festivals they would carry out in
Hepilis.
Perhaps partly due to his experience of
marching armies back and forth, putting
down ceaseless rebellions in the first
years of his reign, one of Darius's
first priorities was to improve the
empire's road [music] system.
Chief among these crucial arteries was
the highway known as the royal road.
Some sections of this highway were
already ancient and had been maintained
by the Assyrian and Babylonian empires.
But Darius [music] improved and expanded
it until it stretched from the empire's
westernmost city of Sardis near [music]
the Mediterranean all the way through
Asia Minor and northern Mesopotamia
until it reached the winter capital of
Susa [music]
at the foot of the Zagros mountains.
Heroditus describes this well-made
highway.
All along the road are royal staging
posts and excellent rest houses. And as
it runs through inhabited country, the
entire road is safe.
If the royal road had been measured
correctly, then the whole journey is
exactly 90 days by foot.
This royal [music] road allowed the
transfer of information at a speed yet
unknown in the ancient world. As
Heroditus describes,
there is nothing that travels faster and
yet is still mortal than these couriers.
It is said that there are as many
[music] horses and men posted at
intervals as there are days required for
the entire journey. So that one horse
and one man [music]
are assigned to each day. And neither
snow nor rain nor heat nor dark of night
keeps them from completing their
appointed course as swiftly as possible.
The first courier passes on the
instructions to the second, the second
to the third, and from there they are
transmitted from one to another as in
the torch race among the Greeks.
It was along one of these roads in the
year 499 BC that a messenger would have
ridden, carrying news to Darius of a
worrying development in the westernmost
part of his empire.
These were the Greekeaking coastal
regions of Asia Minor or what is now
Turkey.
These areas had once been conquered by
the wealthy king Cryus of Lydia and were
then absorbed by Cyrus.
By this time they had been ruled by
Persia for the last 40 years. But now a
messenger brought news that they had
exploded in revolt.
And worst of all, they had outside help.
The Greek states along the western
stretch of the coast of Lydia were
divided into three main groups. the
Aolanss, the Ionians, and the [music]
Dorans, who all spoke related dialects
of Greek.
It was the Ionians that had by [music]
this time had enough of Persian rule.
These were a group of proud and wealthy
cities in Asia Minor that were
traditionally believed to have once been
colonies of the city of Athens.
The Persians had never really worked out
how [music] best to rule over
independent Greek citystates.
In much of their empire, they would rely
on already existing structures of power
to rule over conquered subjects.
For instance, in the Hebrew world, they
relied on local priesthoods to keep the
peace. And in Egypt, they adopted the
power of the pharaohs and temple
priests.
These provinces would then be appointed
[music]
sat traps to lead them who were almost
always Persians appointed by the king of
kings.
Very occasionally they were local rulers
who were allowed to keep most elements
of their previous rule and the
privileges of their position so long as
they swore allegiance to the Persian
Empire.
According to Persian customs, this
swearing of allegiance was done by
offering the King of Kings a gift of
earth and water.
These were the elements crucial for
life, two of the three holy elements in
Iranian belief, and they represented the
[music] elemental power of the monarch.
But each Greek citystate was ruled by a
chaotic mess of aristocratic factions
sharing power in complicated
arrangements.
For this reason, the Persians had simply
settled for choosing a Greek from each
citystate [music]
and appointing him ruler.
These rulers the Greeks referred to with
a word they had loaned from Lydian,
meaning monarch. That word was tyrannos
or tyrant. [music]
In his work politics, the Greek writer
Aristotle describes the difference
between a king and [music] a tyrant.
Tyranny is monarchy exercising the rule
of a master. Kings rule according to law
over voluntary subjects, but tyrants
over involuntary.
The one are guarded by their fellow
citizens. The others are guarded against
them.
These Greek tyrants found themselves in
a difficult position. As Greeks
themselves, they soaked up all the anger
of their people towards Persian rule,
and they were often incompetent,
corrupt, and poorly suited to rule.
Partly as a result of this system, by
the year 499 BC, all of Ionia was
bubbling over with rebellion.
The man who would throw a spark into
this dry tinder was named Aristagaras,
the Greek tyrant of the Ionian city of
Myitus.
Myus was a fine port town that was known
as the jewel of Ionia and its tyrant
Aristagaras [music]
was an unlikely revolutionary.
In fact, he had ruled his city on behalf
of the Persians for the last [music] 12
years. But he had done a poor job.
After attempting a failed invasion of
the island of Knos on behalf of the
empire, he found himself deeply in debt
and wildly unpopular among his people.
Fearing that the Persians would replace
him as the tyrant [music] of Myitus due
to his incompetence, he decided to
change tactics. As [music] Herodotus
describes,
>> it was likely he thought that his
lordship of Mletus would be taken away
from him. With all these fears in mind,
he began to plan revolt.
But Aristagaras knew that rebelling
against the Persian Empire would be
useless unless he could get some outside
help.
To this end, he [music] crossed the sea
to Greece in secret, hoping to find
allies.
First, he approached the most powerful
city in the large southern peninsula
known as the Pelpineese,
the city of Sparta.
The Spartans had for centuries
cultivated a powerful mythos about
themselves and were widely regarded as
the major military power in Greece.
This reputation was sufficient that
Sparta itself had never seen fit to
build a city wall, boasting instead that
its soldiers were all the wall it
needed.
Aristo knew that if his rebellion was to
be a success, he would need the help of
the Spartans.
He went to appeal [music] to one of
Sparta's two kings, a man named
Cleomineses.
And with him he brought a [music] novel
innovation as Heroditus recounts.
Aristagaras the despot of Melatus came
to Sparta. And when he had audience of
the king, he brought with him a bronze
tablet on which the map of all the earth
was engraved and all the sea and all the
rivers.
All the Spartans would need to do, he
[music] told the king, was cross into
Asia, march to the Persian capital of
Susa, and kill King Darius.
The Spartan king began to suspect that
this all sounded a bit too good to be
true.
The king asked Aristagaras how many days
journey it was from the Ionian Sea to
the Persian king.
He said that it was a three-month
journey in land.
At that, Cleominers cut short all the
rest that Aristagaras began to tell him
about the journey and bade his guests
depart from Sparta before sunset. For
never, he said, would the Spartans
listen to the plan if Aristagaras
desired to lead them to a 3month journey
from the sea.
The refusal of King Cleomomanes partly
had to do with the unique characteristic
of Sparta as the Greek world's biggest
slave state.
Like most Greek citystates, Sparta was a
society built on slavery.
But whereas other cities like Athens
kept slaves to work in households and
workshops and usually had a slave
population a little larger than their
free population, Sparta was in a
different league entirely.
Practically its entire agricultural
sector ran on a vast slave class known
as hellets. A kind of laboring surf
bound to the land who outnumbered the
free population by perhaps as many as 10
to one.
And crucially these hellets were Greek.
Other Greek cities held a taboo against
holding other Greeks as slaves. and
their slave populations were made up of
cyians, thrians, and other peoples who
had been captured in piracy or war.
In Sparta, this hellet underclass was
made up of whole Greek ethnicities that
had been conquered long ago and they
were reviled and brutally mistreated.
The Greek writer Myron of Prienne writes
the following description of the helot's
lot.
They assigned to the hellets every
shameful task leading to disgrace. For
they ordained that each one of them must
wear a dogkin cap and wrap himself in
skins and receive a stipulated number of
beatings every year, regardless of any
wrongdoing, so that they would never
forget they were slaves.
The hellets were even ritually murdered
each year in a little understood
ceremony known as the crypta, a word
meaning secret acts.
Understandably unhappy with their
condition, the hellets rose up in
rebellion against their Spartan abusers
a number of times.
As a result, the Spartan military was
made constantly at the ready and their
soldiers carried their spears with them
at all times.
Cleomines must have known that if the
Spartan army was away from home for at
least 6 months in Persia, the Hellets
would likely take the opportunity to
rebel and Sparta would burn.
Despite its great reputation for
warfare, the Spartan army was tied down
in its lands and was all but useless for
anything but the briefest and nearest
campaigns.
Discouraged, Aristagaras left and
traveled to appeal to the perhaps more
unlikely allies.
This was the Greek citystate of Athens.
Although supposedly the mother city of
the Ionian colonies, the city of Athens
had no great reputation for warfare, and
it was [music] at that time in a state
of some political upheaval.
Until recently, it had been ruled by a
tyrant of its own, a man named Hippius.
But he had been overthrown, and in his
place, the Athenians had brought in a
radical system.
This was an emerging form of government
named after the Greek words demos or
people and ctos meaning power. That name
was democracy.
The Athenian system allowed its citizens
to participate in government through
various councils and committees and
enabled them to vote on what policies
and actions the government should take,
usually by a show of hands with special
bronze ballots or using white and black
stones.
Athens was not the only Greek democracy
or the first one, but it was the newest,
largest, and the most powerful city yet
to adopt it.
Democracy in Athens was only available
to adult male citizens and women slaves
and the third or so of the population
that were considered citizens of other
cities were excluded.
In reality, only about a third of the
adult population was actually given any
right to political participation,
but it was still a relatively
progressive system for the time.
Greek critics of democracy argued that
the system had merely replaced the whims
of a king or tyrant with the whims of
the mob, which could be no less
capricious, arbitrary, or foolish.
And when Aristagaras arrived in Athens
that year, pleading for help in his
foolhardy rebellion, some would say that
the Athenian people proved their critics
[music] right. As Heroditus describes
coming before the people, Aristagaras
spoke to the same effect as at Sparta of
the good things of Asia and how the
Persians in war were want to carry
neither shield nor spear [music] and
could easily be overcome.
Truly, it would seem that it is easier
to deceive many than one. For he could
not deceive King Cleomaners of Sparta,
one single man, but 30,000 Athenians he
could.
The Athenians then were one over and
voted the sending of 20 ships in aid of
the Ionians.
The tiny city of Athens had just voted
to attack [music] the largest empire
that the world had ever seen.
The Athenians 20 ships landed in Asia
Minor in 498 BC, packed with soldiers.
There they met with the Ionian Greeks of
Ephesus, who guided them through the
mountains to their target, the old
Lydian capital of Sardis.
Sardis was the home of a Persian satrap
who was the brother of the king of kings
Darius.
It was home to a Persian military
headquarters and a large armory. And the
Greeks hoped that by seizing the city,
they would strike a lethal blow to
Persian rule.
The Greeks moved quickly through the
rocky valleys and took the unprepared
Persian garrison by surprise, breaking
into the city's lower reaches.
The Persians retreated and holed up in
the towering citadel that still looked
down from the top of Mount Tamalus, just
as King Cryus had half a century before.
While the Greeks camped in the city, a
fire broke out, whether accidentally or
not, and it soon spread.
The great capital of Sardis burned.
The greater part of the houses in Sardis
were of reeds, and as many as were of
brick, even they had roofs of reeds. So
it was that when one of these was set a
fire by a soldier, the flames spread
from house to house all over the whole
city. So Sardis was burned and therein
the temple of Kyella, the goddess of the
country.
The once [music] grand city of Sardis
was now a smoking ruin.
The Athenians knew that a Persian army
must have been racing towards them at
[music] that very moment to take the
city back. And with the temple of
Kibella destroyed, they now feared that
the gods themselves [music]
might also have turned against them.
The Athenians began to wonder if perhaps
this whole venture had been a mistake.
They fled the ruined city and pelted
back to the coast and their ships.
And along the royal road of the Persian
Empire, the news raced back to King
Darius at the pace of the empire's
fastest horses.
When Darius heard of the burning of the
city of Sardis by this group of rebels,
he must have been astonished and
enraged.
His own people rebelling was one thing,
but the intervention of the Athenians
was quite another.
These insignificant people from across
the Agian Sea, had meddled completely
unprovoked in his empire, fermented a
rebellion, landed a surprise attack on
one of his most revered cities, and
burned it to the ground, all before
scuttling back to their ships and
sailing away. To the great king [music]
of kings, the Athenians must have seemed
little better than pirates, as Heroditus
[music]
recounts.
When it was reported to Darius that
Sardis had been taken and burnt by the
Athenians, he asked who the Athenians
were. And after receiving the answer, he
called for his bow. This he took and
placing an arrow on it, shot it into the
sky, praying as he sent it aloft.
Ohus, grant me vengeance on the
Athenians.
Then he ordered one of his servants to
say to him three times whenever dinner
was set before him, "Master, remember
the Athenians."
The Athenian Greeks loved repeating this
story as a testament to the king's
obsession with revenge against the city
of Athens for daring to stand up [music]
to the empire.
They loved imagining the name of their
city being spoken in the great court of
Persia.
But from the Persian perspective, we
might also read it another way. That the
Athenians were at that time so
insignificant that without constant
reminders, King Darius feared he might
forget about them completely.
Darius was a man who ruled by a code and
he inscribed this code of principles
[music] into the outer wall of his tomb
at Nakshi Rostam.
It's these principles that must have
been running through his mind when
considering [music] how to deal with the
Athenians.
King Darius says, "I am friend of the
right. Of wrong I am not a friend.
It is not my wish that the weak should
have harm done him by the strong, nor is
it my wish that the strong should have
harm done him by the weak." The right,
that is my desire. The man who is
cooperative according to his cooperation
I reward him. Who does harm him
according to the harm I punish.
Only two years later that punishment
would come in the form of an invasion.
The Greek mainland of Europe is
separated from Asia by a narrow channel
that connects the Mediterranean to the
Black Sea. And in places this channel is
only a mile or so wide.
The narrowest of these straits are known
as the Bosphorus and the Dardinels.
For his 492 BC invasion, Darius
appointed one of his own son-in-laws to
lead the campaign, a young general named
Mardonius.
He ordered him to cross into Europe with
a force of about 30,000 [music]
men. A small army by Persian standards
designed to move quickly and need
minimal supplies.
They crossed at the straits known today
as the Dinels, [music]
but which in ancient times was known as
the Helellispont or the Sea of Helis.
named after a mythical princess who
drowned after falling from a flying
golden [music] ram in the myth of the
golden fleece.
These straits are about 3 km across at
their narrowest point and Mardonius
would have fied his men over using
ships.
Once in Europe, Mardonius subjected the
people of Thrace in what is now Eastern
Greece and Bulgaria and then marched
south to the mountainous kingdom of
Macedon, which they also subjugated and
made a client state of the empire.
With this large Persian army now on the
doorstep of mainland Greece, Darius sent
an offer to the cities of Athens and
Sparta, requesting that they lay down
their arms, swear allegiance to him, and
give him the customary offering of earth
and water.
Heroditus recounts their reaction.
When Darius sent men with this purpose,
those who made the request were cast at
the one city into a pit, and at the
other into a well, and bidden to obtain
their earth and water for the king from
these locations.
It's not clear from Heroditus whether
these men were killed or eventually
fished out from the well.
But either way, mistreating a messenger
in this way was considered an abhorrent
act in Persia. And when Darius heard how
his ambassadors had been abused, it must
have strengthened his belief that he was
dealing with the very worst of
barbarians and stealed his resolve to
crush these tiny cities beneath his
foot.
But the general Mardonius met with some
bad luck on the journey.
His army was ambushed during the night
by a people known as the Brigy, a Thrian
tribe who killed many of his men.
Mardonius himself was even injured when
he was thrown from his horse during the
battle. And at the same time, another
force sent by ship across the Aian was
wrecked in a storm off the rocky coast
of Mount Aos.
It was the first intimation the Persians
would get that conquering Greece might
not be as easy as it seemed.
Not discouraged, 2 years later, Darius
sent another force of about 30,000 men
on a fleet of ships sailing for Athens.
These hocked from island to island
across the Agian, capturing them for the
empire.
With them they brought men, equipment,
supplies, and horses, and even the old
tyrant ruler of Athens, Hippius, who
they intended to put back on the throne
as a Persian puppet.
In early September of 490 BC, they
finally reached the coast of Atica, the
region in which Athens sits.
There, on the advice of Hippius, they
landed at a bay about 40 km or 25 mi
northeast of Athens at a place called
Marathon.
When the Athenians heard of the Persian
army's landing, they gathered every
single available fighting man in a city
and marched out to meet them.
The Persians had chosen their landing
spot because the Bay of Marathon was one
of the few large open spaces in [music]
Attica.
It was a stretch of beach rising to a
flat plane before quickly shooting up to
rocky and impossible highlands broken by
only a couple of narrow passes.
The Greeks knew the area well [music]
and quickly moved to shut off the two
main passes out of the bay.
From there they looked on as the Persian
Expeditionary Force unloaded on the
sand.
Over the last 56 years of intermittent
conflict, no Greek army had ever beaten
a Persian one in battle. And this must
have been playing through their minds as
they watched the Persian ships landing
one by one on the shore.
For a time, both armies stood and
watched one another, and neither were in
a hurry to begin the battle. As
Herodotus recounts,
the Athenian generals were of divided
opinion.
Some advocating [music] not fighting
because they were too few to attack the
army of the Persians, others advocating
fighting.
While they stood and watched their enemy
mass on the beach, the Athenians were
joined by men from the city of Platea.
And they had sent out word to other
allies.
One of these messengers was a man by the
name of Fedipides, who had set out on a
journey of more than 240 km over rocky
mountainous terrain to ask for aid from
the city of Sparta.
The Greeks had nothing like the
sophisticated road system of the Persian
Empire or the way stations where horse
riding messengers could swap out their
tired horses.
The Greeks were mostly not great horse
riders, and when they did ride, they did
so without syrups or a saddle, making
for a slow and uncomfortable ride.
For this reason, if you wanted a message
delivered in Greece at this time, you
simply sent a runner who trained his
whole life for long-d distanceance
journeys of this kind.
Fedipades must have known that countless
[music] lives and perhaps the freedom of
his country depended on him making that
journey swiftly.
But when he arrived in Sparta, he would
be disappointed.
He reached Sparta on the very next day
after quitting the city of Athens. Upon
his arrival, he went before the rulers
and said to them, "Men of Sparta, the
Athenians beseech you to hasten to their
aid and not allow that state, which is
the most ancient in all Greece, to be
enslaved by the barbarians."
The Spartans wished to help the
Athenians but were unable to as it was
then the ninth day of the first decade
and they could not march out of Sparta
when the moon had not reached the full.
The Spartans were at that time
celebrating their annual festival of the
Cara during which campaigning was
forbidden.
Despite their carefully cultivated
reputation for never backing down from a
fight, it was surprisingly common
whenever it was called upon for the city
of Sparta to have something else
terribly important to be doing.
The Spartans would not even leave Sparta
for another week, and the march would
take them at least another 3 days.
Fedipades set out on the road back
[music] to Athens to bring the bad news
of this delay to the soldiers stuck back
on the beach at Marathon.
Outnumbered at least 2 to one, the
Athenians elected to sit and wait for
the Spartan reinforcements to arrive.
But then something forced their hand.
We're not entirely sure why the battle
began when it did before any Spartan
reinforcements appeared,
but it's possible that the Persians had
come up with an idea.
By now they had realized that with every
Athenian fighter waiting there on the
beach blocking their way in land, the
city of Athens must be all but
defenseless.
The Persians may have begun to load up
their ships, perhaps putting the horses
on board first, preparing to set sail
for the city immediately.
Traveling by sea, they would be able to
strike at Athens before the Athenians
were able to run the 25 mi home by foot
in their heavy armor.
Once they saw this Persian plan
unfolding, the Athenians had no choice
but to attack right away.
They advanced, breaking into a run
across the marshy plane and smashed into
the lightly armored Persian infantry. As
Heroditus recounts,
>> the two armies fought together on the
plane of Marathon for a length of time.
And in the mid battle, where the
Persians themselves and the Skytheians
had the place, the barbarians were
victorious and broke and pursued the
Greeks into the inner country.
But on the two wings, the Athenians and
the Plleans defeated the enemy. Having
so done, they suffered the rooted
barbarians to fly at their ease, and
joining the two wings in one, fell upon
those who had broken their own center,
and fought and conquered them. These
likewise fled. And now the Athenians
hung upon the runaways and cut them
down, chasing them all the way to the
shore.
It's speculated that the Persian
cavalry, either half loaded onto the
boats already or simply useless on the
marshy plane, were unable to help the
trapped foot soldiers.
The Persian forces were routed and
Heroditus claims that many thousands
were killed on the beach.
The Greeks managed to capture seven of
the Persian ships, but the rest of the
fleet escaped and now attempted to play
the final card available to them. A
lastditch attempt to attack the
undefended city of Athens.
The remainder the barbarians pushed off,
hoping to reach Athens before the return
of the Athenians. But the Athenians with
all possible speed marched away to the
defense of their city and succeeded in
reaching Athens before the appearance of
the barbarians.
The Greeks had run half the afternoon
through the blazing sun at a distance of
just over 25 mi, about the distance of
what we today commemorate as a marathon.
When the Persians arrived off the coast
of Athens in the Bay of Falum, they saw
with some astonishment that the
Athenians had arrived back to defend
their city and were now standing on the
city walls with their bright shields and
helmets flashing in the sun.
The barbarian fleet arrived and laid off
Valerum, which was at the time the
harbor of Athens.
But after resting a while upon their
oars, they departed and sailed away to
Asia.
The Battle of Marathon has long been
considered a turning point in the
history of Athens.
Although the Persian army that Darius
sent was only a relatively small [music]
expeditionary force, it had been beaten
by a Greek army only half its size.
The Athenians had proven that they could
fight by themselves without the aid of
Sparta. And they had shown that by
carefully choosing the battlefield, the
Persian forces, previously thought
unbeatable, could be overcome.
The Greek dead of Marathon were cremated
and their ashes buried on the
battlefield beneath two great mounds of
earth.
On the tomb of the Athenians, the poet
Simonides wrote the following epigraph.
>> [music]
>> Fighting at the forefront of the Greeks,
the Athenians at Marathon laid low the
army of the gilded Mes.
>> 2 days after the battle, Herodotus
describes how 2,000 Spartans arrived on
the beach at Marathon and saw the mounds
of the dead.
After the full moon, 2,000 Spartans came
to Athens. Although they came too late
for the battle, they desired to see the
Persians. So, they went to Marathon and
saw them, and they departed again,
praising the Athenians and their
achievement.
For the Spartans, the fact that Athens
had fought and won without them would be
a sore point that would last for at
least the next decade.
As for the great King Darius, when news
reached him of the defeat at Marathon,
we can only imagine the frosty [music]
atmosphere at court.
Heroditus renders one version of his
reaction.
The message about the battle of Marathon
came to King Darius. So he was now more
furious than ever and even more resolved
to march against Greece. He immediately
sent messengers to each city, ordering
them to prepare a much larger force than
before, as well as ships, horses, grain,
and vessels. As a result of these
demands, Asia was a stir for three years
with the best men enrolled for service
against Greece and getting ready for
war.
But by the time this massive force was
ready to set [music] sail for Greece,
events in the empire overtook the great
king.
Darius's increasing demands for men and
grain to service his Greek wars had
caused resentment in the various
satropes of the empire and especially in
Egypt.
The defeat at Marathon may also have
emboldened some who wished to break free
of the empire.
Now around 486 BC, Egypt rose up against
its Persian governor.
The army that Darius had gathered to
conquer Greece now sailed for Egypt
[music] instead.
Darius, now a relatively old man of 65,
prepared to go with them.
But before he could depart, the king was
taken suddenly ill.
The Greek writer Tissus records the
final days of Darius.
Das went back to Persia and made two
sacrifices.
And after an illness of 30 days, he
passed away.
Darius had been king for 36 years, and
though his rule had started in [music]
scandal and lies, he had ushered in an
era of stability and strength.
Across the empire, Persians mourned for
their king.
They put out their sacred fires in
recognition of their grief, shaved their
heads, and clipped the [music] manes of
their horses as a sign of respect.
On his tomb at Nakshi Rostam, Darius had
carved an illustration of his throne,
supported from beneath by row upon
[music] row of people, each dressed in a
distinctive fashion of one of the
peoples of the empire.
And alongside it, he [music] wrote the
following inscription that would serve
as his epitap.
If now you shall think how many other
countries which King Darius held, look
at the sculptures who bear the throne,
then shall you know, the spear of a
Persian man has gone forth far.
Then shall it become known to you, a
Persian man has delivered battle far
indeed from Persia.
The throne of the empire now passed to
one of the oldest sons of Darius, a man
who in old Persian was named Husharia,
a name which means he who rules over
heroes.
But the Greeks would call him Xerxes.
In the days that followed, this Xerxes
would have traveled to Pasagadi, the old
capital of Cyrus to be crowned. And
there he would enter the sanctuary of
the goddess Anahita.
Plutarch describes the ceremony that
would have ensued inside.
There is a temple dedicated to a warlike
goddess. The royal person to be
initiated must enter it. Must strip
himself of his own robe and put on the
one that Cyrus the first wore before he
was king. Then, having devoured a cake
of figs, he must chew tarpentine resin
and drink a cup of sour milk.
This ritual was supposed to remind each
new king of the hard life that the
founder of the empire had lived and the
meager foods he [music] had subsisted on
while on campaign.
A ceremony designed to remind them that
being king involved hardship and
sacrifice.
When he left that sanctuary, Xerxes was
the new king of kings, king of the four
quarters [music] of the world, and
emperor of the Persians.
Perhaps throughout this ceremony, while
the priests chanted their songs around
him, his father's last words to him
would have echoed in his head.
We will never know what those might have
been. But given the choices that Xerxes
would make during his rule, it might not
be far-fetched to imagine that Darius
had made his son promise him that no
matter what, he would make the Athenians
pay for what they had done.
When Xerxes got to the throne, the first
6 years of his reign was spent crushing
the revolt still ongoing in Egypt and
then putting down another two that arose
in Babylon.
But the moment his empire was secure, he
turned his sights on the prize that had
slipped from his father's grasp, and
where the empire's great humiliation had
taken place.
In the spring of 480 BC, the army of
Xerxes was ready. a large force of
perhaps 60 to 80,000 soldiers, more than
twice the size of the army that had been
beaten at Marathon.
At the head of these men, he marched out
from the Lydian capital of Sardis and
towards the crossing of the Helispont.
With him he brought a man with direct
experience of fighting in Greece.
The general that had led his father's
campaign, the now middle-aged Mardonius.
To cross the narrow sea channel of the
Hllispont, Xerxes ordered a remarkable
piece of infrastructure to be built. Two
great floating pontoon bridges, each
made out of more than 300 ships tied
together with ropes of flax and papyrus
and with a wooden road surface laid
across them.
These bridges even had canvas screens on
either side so that the horses would not
become scared at the sight of the
rocking waters beneath them.
These bridges would stretch more than
1.4 4 km across the waters of the
Hellispont, making them the longest
bridges that the world had ever seen,
and they crossed a stretch of sea that
experiences some of the strongest
currents in the Mediterranean.
It was a clear statement of the Empire's
ambition, resources, and determination
to crush their enemies.
But the weather would conspire against
Xerxes ambition. And Heroditus describes
one account of his furious reaction.
But no sooner had the straight been
bridged than a great storm swept down
and broke and scattered all the work.
When Xerxes heard of that, he was very
angry and gave command that the
helispond be scourged with 300 lashes
and a pair of fetterss be thrown into
the sea. Thou bitter water, they should
say. Our master thus punishes thee,
because thou dit him wrong.
This legend of Xerxes ordering the sea
to be whipped is likely a Greek tale
designed to make the king look despotic
and ridiculous.
And in fact, with everything we know
about the Persian reverence for water,
it seems incredibly unlikely.
We can be sure that Xerxes would have
offered prayers and offerings to the
waters before crossing them. And perhaps
it is a Greek misunderstanding of these
ceremonies that Heroditus is recounting.
For much of the story that follows, for
better or worse, Herodotus is our only
source.
He was certainly interested in
portraying the truth of past events, but
he was also trying to tell a ripping
story that glorified the exploits of the
Greeks. Heroditus was writing about 50
years after the Persian wars and by that
time this conflict had taken on epic
proportions in the Greek imagination.
To the Greeks the Persian wars held a
similar place as the Second World War to
us today. A great clash between good and
evil. a fight over the nature of
civilization and the fiery conflict in
which the world as they knew it had been
born.
For this reason, the account of
Heroditus is a crucial source, but one
that has to be treated very carefully.
With his bridges suitably repaired,
Xerxes marched into Europe and there he
would meet with remarkable success.
He marched through his subject of Thrace
and received help from his allies in
Macedon, a king named Alexander.
Xerxes was marching to war, but he was
also demonstrating the power and breadth
of his empire.
He ensured that his army was made up of
one unit from every one of the empire's
provinces, a colorful and garish display
that would have had a simple message.
The entire world is marching against
Greece. You are either with me or
against me.
From Macedon, Xerxes marched south, his
army moving in three columns, each with
a separate route so they wouldn't clog
the road.
They made such an impressive site that
many generations later, the local
Thrians still pointed out to travelers
the road along which the great army had
traveled.
The size of the force was such that
Greek writers like Heroditus would
inflate it to the absurd size of two or
3 million men. But modern analysis of
the constraints of supply and transport
in the ancient world reckon that about
100,000 soldiers is a reasonable
estimate for the maximum possible size
of an army at this time.
Along the way, the engineers of Xerxes
improved the roads and built bridges,
cutting through the mountains and
bending the landscape to his will.
At the peninsula of Mount Aos, where one
of his father's fleets had been wrecked
in a storm, Xerxes ordered the digging
of a mileong canal that cut through the
Istamus and allowed his ships to avoid
sailing around the dangerous headland.
On the way, Heroditus describes, with
perhaps some exaggeration, the army
draining lakes dry while watering their
pack animals.
But it's true that supplying this great
army was no easy task.
For that reason, they never strayed far
from the sea, where the Persian Navy was
able to support them and continually
bring food and foder for the animals.
Behind them, an ants trail of supply
carts must have led back along the road,
bringing supplies over from their
crucial bridges of boats, and supply
depots that had been set up years in
advance fed the soldiers on their march.
On their way, Heroditus describes the
Persians suffering problems with the
local Greek wildlife.
As Xerxes thus marched, lions attacked
the camels that carried his provisions.
Nightly they would come down out of
their lairs and made havoc.
Despite these challenges, Xerxes's army
soon passed the towering gray rock faces
of Mount Olympus and marched south into
the large, fertile plains of Thessal.
Ahead of his advance, he sent messengers
to the northern Greek regions and
cities, demanding that they give him
offerings of earth and water.
Many Greeks did so and thereby went over
to the Persian side.
These included the Greeks of Thesali and
thieves who hated the Athenians and even
the people of the sacred center of
Delelfi.
Some of these Greeks must have felt that
they had no other choice when faced with
the might of Persia, while others may
have reveled in the opportunity to shift
the dominance of Athens and Sparta in
the Greek world.
Others chose their stance simply due to
petty rivalries within Greece. As
Heroditus describes,
the Fosians alone of all that region
would not take the Persians side, and
that for no other reason than their
hatred of the Thessalans. Had the
Thessalons aided the Greek side, then
the Fosians would certainly have stood
for the Persians.
But to Athens and Sparta, King Xerxes
sent no messengers, remembering bitterly
how they had mistreated his father's
ambassadors a generation earlier.
The Greeks who chose to stand up to the
empire were now outnumbered.
They needed to find a way to gain an
advantage. And they would do this by
using the landscape of Greece itself.
A landscape of mountainous highlands
broken by narrow passes.
Xerxes and his army were following the
sea shore, staying close to their supply
ships, and their route would take them
along one narrow passage between the sea
and the mountains.
As the summer came to an end, this was
the place that the allied Greeks chose
to defend the whole of the south. A
place about 200 km northwest of Athens
at a site called Thermopoly.
Heroditus describes their deliberation.
The Greeks consulted together how and
where they should stand to fight.
The council that prevailed was that they
should guard the pass of the mopoly, for
they saw that it was narrower than the
pass into the moreover near a home.
The name thermopoly means hot gates, so
named for the sulfurous thermal springs
that rise up out of the earth nearby.
One legend has it that the waters here
are hot because it was here that the
hero Heracles had tried to wash off the
poison of the fearsome Hydra.
Today, the battlefield looks very
different since silt buildup from the
nearby Spare Chaos River has pushed back
the ancient coastline and created a wide
plane where once a rocky bay stood.
But in ancient times, the sea would have
lapped close up to the sheer sided slope
of Mount Caladromos,
creating a number of narrow bottlenecks,
which the Greeks called gates.
In ancient times, the Fosian people had
built a wall at the pass of Themopoly to
keep out the hated Theelians, a rivalry
that still burned to that day.
But now this crumbling Fosian wall would
help repel a much different enemy.
The Greeks hoped that with 20 to 30,000
heavily armored hoplights holding the
pass of thermopoly, the Persians would
have no hope but to turn back.
But things would not go according to
their plan.
This was partly because August was the
Greek season of leisure.
The harvest had been brought in, the
days were long and languid, and the
Olympic festival was taking place across
Greece.
This was a religious celebration of the
king of the gods, Zeus, combined with a
series of athletic challenges held at
the religious sanctuary of Olympia every
four years.
Greeks had long observed a truce during
the games so that athletes and religious
[music] pilgrims could travel the roads
without fear and no one wanted to go to
war during the festival.
In their rocky peninsula, the Spartans
were once again celebrating their annual
festival of the Carnea when military
campaigning was officially restricted.
Perhaps if the Greeks had realized
[music] how quickly the Persian army was
advancing, they would have felt more
urgency to rush to the battlefield. As
Heroditus describes,
they intended when they had celebrated
[music]
the Carnean festival to leave a garrison
in Sparta and hasten in full force to
join the army.
The rest of [music] the Allies also
intended to act similarly, for it had
happened that the Olympic festival fell
exactly at this [music] same period.
None of them looked to see the contest
at the mopoly decided so speedily.
But rebuilding the Fosan wall would take
time and they wanted to make sure it was
ready when the main army arrived.
To secure the pass and begin the work of
rebuilding this wall, the Spartans bent
the rules and sent a small unit of only
300 soldiers led by a son of King
Cleomes,
a man whose name meant son of the lion.
His name was Leonidis.
Leonidis and his small contingent were
to rendevu at Thermopoly with a number
of soldiers gathered from other Greek
allies totaling about 7,000 men and
ensure that no Persian advance party
slipped through the pass.
It was not a large army, but it wasn't
small either. In fact, it was only a few
thousand smaller than the force that had
beat the Persians at Marathon. [music]
But Xerxes's army had moved faster than
anyone realized.
The Persians arrived at the pass of
Themropoly in early August to find only
this small holding force stationed
between the mountains and the sea,
blocking their way.
The Greeks under Leonidis were taken
completely by surprise and an awkward
standoff ensued.
At first, Xerxes didn't believe that the
Greeks actually intended to fight in
this narrow pass. They were outnumbered
as much as 10 to one. And in fact, the
Persian king waited there for 4 days,
expecting the Greeks to withdraw.
But on the fourth day, they were still
there, blocking his only path.
Frustrated at the lack of progress,
Xerxes ordered his men to attack.
But the Greeks were perfectly suited to
this kind of warfare.
Greek hoplights were heavily armored and
carried large round shields, fighting in
a shield wall with long 7 ft spears that
kept their enemy at bay.
On an open battlefield, they were
naturally weak to cavalry and vulnerable
to being surrounded. But in the narrow
paths of Themopoly, these weaknesses
evaporated, and they simply refused to
budge.
Persian warriors on the whole were
lightly equipped, designed to move fast
and travel long distances across the
empire to fight wherever they were
needed.
They were also from a culture with
nomadic warrior roots that may have
viewed the heavy armor of the Greeks as
an expression of cowardice.
The Greeks in turn looked down on the
Persian tactics and considered the bow
and arrow to be a cowardly weapon.
Heroditus describes the ensuing combat.
When the Persians moved forward and
attacked the Greeks, there fell many of
them and others kept coming up
continually. And during these onsets, it
is said that the king looking on three
times leapt up from his seat, struck
with fear for his army.
Next, the Persians tried to pelt the
Greeks with arrows to weaken their
position. But this bombardment only
rained down on the broad shields of the
hotlights.
And soon the Greeks were even cracking
jokes about it.
The Spartan Dianus is said to have
proved himself the best man of all.
Being informed by one of the men of
Traxxas [music] that when the barbarians
discharged their arrows, they obscured
the light of the sun by the multitude of
the arrows. He was not dismayed by this.
He said that their guest from Traxxas
brought them very good news. For if the
mess obscured the light of the sun, the
battle against them would be in the
shade.
The fighting went on for 3 days.
Throughout this time, the Greeks rotated
out the men who fought at the front of
their lines so they didn't become
exhausted. And by this time, Xerxes's
frustration must have grown to genuine
concern.
The pass of Themopoly had been held to
great effect by only 7,000 men. And he
began to realize that if the main force
of Greeks arrived, probably three or
four times that number, it might hold
out forever, and his invasion of Greece
would stop right there on the rocky
shore of the Marian Gulf.
But in the end, Xerxes would prevail,
and his victory would come not at the
tip of a spear, but with Persian
experience, at the careful and
meticulous gathering of intelligence.
Wherever they went, they were adept at
developing a network of spies and
informers.
And everywhere the flash of Persian
gold, each coin stamped with the symbol
of an archer, paved the way to the
information they needed.
At Thermopoly, they soon found a local
man who was able to show them another
pass through the mountains concealed
with forests of oak.
Ephealties, the son of Uridamus, came to
Xerxes and was admitted to a conference.
Stirred by the hope of receiving a rich
reward at the king's hands, he had come
to tell him of the pathway which led
across the mountain to Thermopoly, by
which disclosure he brought destruction
on the band of Greeks, who had there
withstood the barbarians.
This path would allow them to cut off,
surround, and utterly destroy the army,
blocking the thermopoly pass.
When the Greeks heard of the Persian
plan, they saw that they would be
surrounded, and King Leonidis knew that
the battle was lost.
He ordered the rest of the army to
retreat and stayed behind with his royal
bodyguard and some assorted thespian and
Theban allies to hold the pass a little
while longer.
This was an act of personal bravery by
the Spartans who remained, but it was
also a tactical necessity.
If the whole army retreated, Persian
heavy cavalry would have pursued them
and likely cut them down to a man.
Spartan hoplights had also been raised
within a brutal warrior culture that
demanded their sacrifice [music] in
battle.
Men who returned from losing battles
were often treated as cowards and
shunned in Spartan society.
Even two men who Leonidis sent away from
Thermopoly due to injuries were treated
as outcasts when they returned to the
city as Heroditus describes.
When Aristomus returned to Sparta,
reproached and disgrace awaited him. No
Spartan would give him a light to kindle
his fire or so much as address a word to
him. all spoke of him as the coward.
Another of the 300 is likewise said to
have survived the battle, a man named
Pantitis.
He, they said, on his return to Sparta
found himself in such [music] disesteem
that he hanged himself.
For Xerxes, the battle at Themopoly had
been a resounding victory.
He had surprised his enemy before their
reinforcements were able to arrive,
outmaneuvered them on their home soil,
and forced them to retreat from the
choke point they had hoped to defend.
And thrown into the bargain, he had cut
off and killed one of the two kings of
Sparta, meaning that a child now sat on
one of its thrones.
For the Greeks, Thermopoly was a sorry
defeat tactically and strategically.
But virtually from the moment the battle
ended, they began putting it to another
purpose that was of propaganda.
The legend of the heroic last stand of
Leonidis would be repeated over and over
and used as a rallying call to other
Greeks to fight against the Persians.
Heroditus himself was so inspired by the
story of the battle that he claimed to
have memorized the names of all 300 of
the Spartans who fought there.
Leonidas fell fighting bravely together
with many other famous Spartans whose
names I have taken care to learn on
account of their great worthiness. as
indeed I have those of all the 300.
At the same time that the battle of
Thermopoly was going on, the Greek fleet
had also clashed with the Persian navy
at the nearby straits of Artameeseium.
And on the sea, the contest was a little
more even.
Both sides took heavy losses, but the
heavily outnumbered Greek fleet was
forced to retreat when they heard about
the defeat at Thermopoly.
Their ships were scattered and limped
home to the island of Salamus, which
sits just off the Athenian coast.
With the final choke point on the way to
Athens now overcome, the Persian army
eagerly advanced into southern Greece,
looting and burning as they went.
The Athenians hoped that the Spartans
would help defend their city, but they
would be disappointed.
Sparta withdrew all its forces right
back to the Pelpineese Peninsula where
they began building a wall across its
narrow istamus of Corinth trying to
achieve there what they had failed to do
at the mopoly.
But that meant that the city of Athens
was left all but defenseless.
Realizing that they were now alone, the
Athenians fled the city.
The refugees boarded ships and escaped
to the nearby island of Salamus, leaving
Athens, a ghost town.
They made a proclamation that every
Athenian should save his children and
servants as he best could. Thereupon
most of them sent the members of their
households to Troen, and some to Aena
and Salamus.
The Persians swept into the deserted
city, killed a few determined defenders
holed up in the Acropolis, and burned
[music] Athens to the ground.
Its tightly packed houses of wood and
mudbrick burned swiftly.
The burning of Sardis had finally been
avenged.
Xerxes must have been delighted.
In only four months, he had achieved the
dream of his father and now stood upon
the smoldering ruins of Athens.
His invasion had been a roaring success,
and his enemies [music] now scattered
before him.
All he needed to do was round on the now
isolated city of Sparta, break through
their makeshift Corinthian wall, and
crush them completely.
At the sight of the Persian army on the
horizon, it's likely that Sparta's helot
underclass would have taken the
opportunity to rebel. And facing their
enemies from within and without, the
last independent power in Greece would
have fallen.
But this Xerxes didn't do.
Instead, he made an enormous mistake.
Against the advice of one of his chief
naval commanders, a queen named
Artameeseia of Hakarnas,
he ordered his fleet to round on the
island of Salamus, where the Athenian
refugees were sheltering, and destroy
what remained of the Greek ships
harbored there.
This Greek fleet had actually been built
only 3 years earlier on the urging of a
particular Athenian statesman named
Theisticles
as Heroditus recounts.
Now there was a certain Athenian by name
Theisticles who had lately risen to be
among their chief men. The Mysticles
persuaded the Athenians to build 200
ships of war, compelling the Athenians
to become sailors.
These ships were of the latest design,
large and heavy warships that dwarfed
the smaller Persian ships, but they were
also drastically outnumbered by the
Persian fleet, which had perhaps 500
vessels.
Now sure of victory, the Persians sailed
in and descended on the scattered
Athenians.
But things would not go to Xerxes's
plan.
Once again, the Greeks chose their
battlefield well.
In the cramped straits of Salamus, the
Persian warships were forced to cram
together, preventing their oars from
moving.
Meanwhile, the Greeks knew the winds and
currents of these waters. Some of them
would have been sailing and fishing
there since they were children.
They rammed into the flanks of the
trapped Persian fleet to devastating
effect.
The playwright Acilus, likely an
eyewitness of the battle and who would
lose his brother in the fighting, would
write the following description of the
carnage.
When the mass of their ships had been
crowded in the narrows, and none could
render another aid, and each crashed its
bronze prow against each of its own
line. They splintered their whole bank
of oes. Then the Greek galleys hemmed
them in and battered them on every side.
The shores and reefs were crowded with
dead, and every ship that formed a part
of the barbarian fleet plied its oars in
disorderly flight. Groans and shrieks
together filled the open sea until the
face of black knight hid the scene.
The battle of Salamus was a disaster.
Among the dead were several of Xerxes's
own brothers and countless Persian
noblemen from the court of Pepilus.
When news reached the Persians of what
had happened, Heroditus imagines their
reaction.
When the first message came to Susa,
telling that Xerxes had taken Athens, it
gave such delight to the Persians who
were left at home that they strewned all
the roads with myrtle boughs and burnt
incense and gave themselves up to
sacrificial feasts and jolly.
But the second message coming on the
heels of the first, so confounded them
that they all rent their tunics and
cried and lamented without ceasing.
Once the dust of the battle had settled,
Xerxes must have realized the enormity
of his mistake.
His fleet was a crucial element in his
invasion.
With it destroyed, his army now had no
way of getting supplies from the Persian
mainland, and they feared being stranded
in Europe, as Heroditus describes.
When Xerxes was aware of the calamity
that had befallen him, he feared less
the Greeks might sail to the Helispont
to break his bridges, and he might be
cut off in Europe and in peril of his
life.
And so he planned to flee.
>> Xerxes soon departed and took more than
half of his army with him.
His most capable troops he left in the
care of the veteran general Mardonius
and took the rest north, crossing back
over his bridges of boats.
The reasons for this departure we can
never know.
Heroditus paints a picture of a cowardly
king fleeing in panic. But it may not
have looked like this from the Persian
side.
They had achieved virtually all of their
war aims and the king had to return home
to participate in the ceremonial
calendar of Persian royalty.
He may have assumed that the war was
simply over.
But regardless, the king's departure
certainly emboldened the Greeks.
In 479 BC, the Greek allies were able to
amass an enormous force, perhaps the
largest Greek army ever gathered, and
marched out to meet the Persians, who
were still camped in the ruins [music]
of Athens.
When he heard that this army was
approaching, the Persian general
Mardonius ordered that everything left
standing in the city be torn down to the
very foundations.
Then he retreated to a wide plane at a
place called Platea.
There, the combined forces of Athens and
Sparta converged on the Persians and the
20 to 30,000 Greek allies who fought
alongside them.
Now surrounded, exhausted, and cut off
from their supplies and with their king
departed for home, the Persians were
finally overcome.
So long as Mardonius was alive, the
Persians stood their ground and defended
[music] themselves, overthrowing many
Spartans. But when Mardonius was slain
and his guards, who were the strongest
part of the army, then the rest too
yielded and gained ground.
The Persian army retreated from the
battle to their fortified camp, which
the Greeks surrounded.
They breached the walls and began a
general slaughter that left few alive.
The general Mardonius was killed.
From this moment on, the Persian force
that Xerxes had brought to Greece was no
more, and all Persian attempts to
conquer the Greek mainland came to an
end.
But Xerxes, for his part, put a typical
Persian spin on the situation.
On one of his inscriptions he had carved
at Pipilus, he includes one oblique
reference that many think refers to this
disastrous campaign.
When I became king, there was one among
the countries which was in disorder.
By the favor of a hurah Mazda, I
overwhelmed that country and put it in
its proper place.
Despite Xerxes's attempts to spin it,
the defeat in Greece was not a minor
setback for the empire.
Persia had marched across the
Hellellispont with a huge force of men
brought from every corner of its domain,
and these had been all but eradicated.
[music]
In every part of the empire, wives and
mothers and [music] children would now
mourn the men who never came home.
In Egypt, women let their hair fall
loose and scattered sand on their heads
as incense drifted through the streets.
In Babylon, wives tore their robes and
sat in silence with ash on their faces.
In media, riders wore black wool and led
their horses unbridled through the
streets
and everywhere. The empire's failure
would have been understood. [music]
Even in the Persian royal court, a
significant period of mourning must have
followed.
Xerxes's own sister was the wife of the
general Mardonius who he had abandoned
to fight [music] at Platea and a
multitude of courtiers now lay at the
bottom of the bay of Salamus.
The campaign was a strategic disaster
too. For the next 50 years, the Persian
Empire would have to contend with the
fleets of the emboldened Greek states
buzzing like hornets around its [music]
western fringes.
And whenever a rebellion flared up
anywhere in Persia, the Greeks made sure
to support it.
But the blow was far from a fatal one.
And in fact, [music] the Persian Empire
continued to flourish for another 150
years.
And during this time, it continued to
export its influence overseas.
Over the next decades, while the Greeks
rebuilt their devastated cities, they
regailed each other with tales of the
Persian wars, now as momentous in their
minds as the Trojan War once had been.
The playwright Ecolus himself a veteran
of many of the battles delighted
Athenian audiences by putting words into
the mouth of Xerxes himself in his play
the Persians which he debuted only 8
years after the battle of Salamus.
Alas, wretched I am, who have met this
cruel doom, which did not give the
faintest sign of its coming. In what
savage mood has fortune trampled upon
the Persian race? What misery is yet in
store for me? Unhappy wretch.
The land bewales her native youth
slaughtered for Xerxes who has crowded
the underworld with Persian slain.
But as much as they enjoyed stories of
their underdog victory, throughout the
decades that followed, Greeks and
especially Athenians began to develop a
taste for Persian things.
One of the biggest influences on Athens
was in the realm of fashion.
By the middle of the fifth century BC,
we can see from painted vasees that
clothes with sleeves began to appear on
Athenian streets patterned in Persian
styles.
Some of these garments were made in
Athens, but others were actually
imported from Persia. itself.
Archaeologists have found traces of
Indian cotton and Chinese silk in
Athenian graves beginning around this
time, showing that Persian goods were
flowing into the city in record amounts.
Athenians also began wearing
Persianstyle slippers on their feet.
In his work, A History of the
Pelpeneisian War, Thusidities criticizes
the Athenian love of these Eastern
fashions.
The Athenians were the first to lay
aside their weapons and to adopt [music]
an easier and more luxurious mode of
life. Indeed, their rich old men had the
luxury of wearing undergarments of linen
and fastening a knot of their hair with
a tie of golden grasshoppers.
For a long time, Greeks had particularly
mocked the Persian custom of carrying
parasolles to protect themselves from
the sun. But in the decades following
the Persian wars, wealthy Greeks in
Athens themselves began carrying
parasolles.
And for the especially wealthy
Athenians, they imitated Persian kings
in having their slaves carry the
parasolles for them.
It has even been suggested that when the
Greeks [music] rebuilt the Pathonon at
the heart of the Athenian Acropolis on
top of the rubble left by the Persians,
the Athenians imitated the styles of the
palaces of Persia. In particular, the
Pipilus freezes.
Just like the palace of Pepilolis, the
Pathnon marbles show all the peoples of
the Athenian lands, bringing goods and
tribute to the great city.
It's possible that the craftsmen they
brought in to do the work had also honed
their craft while working on Persian
palaces. [music]
The great king Xerxes never let go of
his obsession.
Over the next decade, he gathered
another army and fleet in order to crush
what was now an open rebellion among
Greek citystates all along the western
coast of his empire.
But these forces were destroyed in the
battle of Urimidon in 469 BC.
A daring strike by the Greeks that
actually took place in Persian lands. As
Thusidities recounts,
the Athenians won both battles on the
same day and captured and destroyed the
whole Phoenician fleet consisting of 200
vessels.
This battle was a symptom of just how
emboldened the Greeks had now become.
Perhaps it was this final defeat that
would have turned Xerxes away from
Greece forever. But we will never know.
That's because four years later in the
autumn of 465 BC, a commander of the
king's bodyguard named Arturabanis
conspired along with a palace unuk to
seize the throne. As the Greek writer
Tissus recounts,
Artbanis, the commander of the god,
plotted against Xerxes. He went in by
night to the king's chamber and slew him
while he slept.
>> The son and heir of Xerxes named Darius
was also killed in the violence [music]
that suddenly engulfed the palace.
When the conspiracy was discovered,
another of Xerxes's sons drew his sword
[music] and came to revenge his father.
He managed to kill the plotting unic and
the general Arturabanis and foil their
plan.
This man's name in old Persian was Artak
Shatra or he who holds power through
truth.
But in Greek he would come to be known
as Artac Xerxes.
King Artac Xerxes seems to have had a
quite different temperament to his rash
and vengeful father Xerxes.
We can see this demonstrated in the
story of the incredible career of one
Athenian Greek who had been instrumental
in the defeat of Xerxes only 30 years
earlier.
That was the Athenian statesman and
admiral Themeisticles.
Theisticles was the man who had first
convinced the Athenians to build a fleet
and he had commanded it during the
pivotal battle of Salamus.
He was perhaps the one man most
responsible for repelling the Persian
invasion. But in the years since
Theisticles had fallen out of favor in
Athens. [music]
Eventually, its citizens voted to
ostracize him from the city, a kind of
exile.
Humiliated and outcast, The Mysticles
then left Greece.
But instead of fading into obscurity, he
took the decision to travel to Persia
where he presented himself at the court
of the son of his great enemy, King
Artac Xerxes.
This was an especially daring move
because in Persia, Theisticles actually
had a bounty on his head set at 200
talents or more than 5 metric tons of
silver.
But when Theisticles presented himself
before the new Persian king of kings,
Artac Xerxes seemed more amused than
anything, as Plutarch recounts.
When he had come into the king's
presence, the king welcomed him and
spake him kindly and said he already
owed the Greek 200 talents. For since he
had delivered himself up, it was only
just that he should receive the reward
proclaimed for his capture.
The king next asked the mysticles to
explain why he had come before him. But
the Greek apologized that he had [music]
not yet learned the Persian language.
The mysticles answered that the speech
of man was like embroidered tapestries
since when it was rolled up it concealed
and distorted its patterns. For this
reason he had need of time. The
mysticles asked for a year and in that
time he learned the Persian language
sufficiently to have interviews with the
king by himself without interpreters.
[music]
Theisticles soon became a trusted
adviser to the Persian king and over the
next six or seven years taught him how
to deal with his Greek enemies.
And perhaps partly due to the advice of
the man who had once destroyed his
father's fleet, Artac Xerxes struck upon
a new way of handling the Greek problem.
By this time, the Athenians were
becoming so bold that they were actually
supporting a rebellion in Egypt, clearly
aiming to break the Persian Empire apart
piece by piece.
In response, Artac Xerxes began a policy
so simple and effective that it's
remarkable no Persian king had thought
of it before. He began pouring funds
towards Athens's enemies in Greece.
And the greatest rival of Athens was of
course Sparta.
The Greek writer Thusides wrote the
following description of what happened
next.
For a short time, the Greek League held
together, till the Spartans and
Athenians quarreled and made war upon
each other with their allies, a jewel
into which all the Greeks sooner or
later were drawn, though some might at
first remain neutral, so that the whole
period from the Persian War to this,
with some peaceful intervals, was spent
by each power in war.
This conflict would become known as the
Pelponyian War and it would rage for
nearly three decades after 431 BC.
During all this time, the Persians made
sure to put all of their resources at
[music] Sparta's disposal.
And in exchange, the Greeks were willing
to give the Persians concessions [music]
that up to that point had seemed
unthinkable.
They would soon relinquish any claim to
the Greek cities in Asia Minor as the
following treaty proposed between Persia
and Sparta [music]
states.
Whatever country or cities the king has
or the king's ancestors had shall be the
kings. And whatever came into the
Athenians from these cities, either
money or any other thing, the king and
the Spartans shall jointly hinder the
Athenians from receiving.
The war with the Athenians shall be
carried on jointly by the king and by
the Spartans [music] and their allies.
Sparta had always been a land power and
had hardly any navy, something that put
them at a disadvantage to the Athenians
in war. But the Persians funded the
construction of a large fleet for Sparta
to match the Athenians at sea and to
ensure that the war dragged on for as
long as possible.
Some decades later, during the
Corinthian war that followed, the
Persians would in turn fund the
Athenians to build a new fleet of their
own to destroy a Spartan fleet that the
Persians had also funded.
While this policy may have seemed
circular and a little ridiculous, it
successfully kept the major cities of
Greece occupied, fighting one another.
Never again would they marshall the kind
of united force that had defeated the
Persians at Platea.
One Spartan king would later remark
bitterly that the Greeks had been
defeated by 10,000 Persian archers,
meaning not an army, but the symbol of
an archer that the empire stamped on
each one of its gold coins.
With this shrewd foreign policy, the
Persian Empire's western border finally
achieved a level of stability.
Artac Xerxes ruled for 41 years, longer
than either of the more famous kings,
Darius or Xerxes, [music]
and his rule was arguably more
successful.
His shrewd foreign policy coupled with
domestic stability and the empire
flourished.
But after his death in 424 BC, the
trouble began.
His son Xerxes II would rule for only 45
days before two of his brothers plotted
to depose him. One of these brothers
named Sdianis took the throne, but ruled
for only 6 months before himself being
deposed.
The empire returned to some degree of
stability during the 20-year reign of
King Darius II. But when he died in 404
BC, it would once more return to a
bloody and destructive state of civil
war.
This conflict came about due to a
rivalry between two of Darius's sons,
his eldest son, Aries, and the youngest
son, Cyrus.
While Aries had always been favored by
his father, the king, as a thoughtful
and [music] pragmatic young man, Cyrus
was the most beloved of their mother, as
the Greek writer Zenapon records.
Darius had two sons. The elder was named
Ares and the younger Cyrus. Now, as
Darius lay sick and felt that the end of
life drew near, he wished both his sons
to be with him. But Cyrus's mother had
more love for Cyrus than for Ares upon
his throne.
When Darius died, his chosen heir,
Arles, became king and took on the
throne name Artac Xerxes II.
But his brother, Cyrus, would not be
satisfied.
Artac Xerxes soon uncovered a plot by
Cyrus to kill him and take the throne
for himself.
Artac Xerxes had his brother arrested
and dragged before the court to answer
for himself.
Everyone expected Cyrus to be executed
for his crime. But at the last moment,
their mother intervened.
She threw herself before the king and
pleaded for her favorite son's life.
Moved by his mother's please, Artac
Xerxes chose to let his brother go and
instead sent him away back to his home
province of Lydia.
But this would turn out to be a mistake.
Artic Xerxes laid hands upon Cyrus,
desiring to put him to death. But his
mother made intercession for him, and
instead he sent him back again in safety
to his province. Cyrus then, having so
escaped through peril and dishonor, fell
to considering not only how he might
avoid ever again being in his brother's
power, but how, if possible, he might
become king in hisstead.
Back in his home province, Cyrus began
gathering an army in secret.
This force would include 20,000 warriors
of his own, but he knew this wouldn't be
enough.
To supplement his forces, he hired
12,000 mercenaries.
Of these, 10,000 were Greek hoplights
come to sell their spears in Persia.
With the addition of these Greeks, the
wouldbe usurpus Cyrus now commanded the
largest army of hoplights anywhere in
the world, twice the size of the Spartan
army at the time. Among these 10,000 was
the Greek writer and adventurer Zenapon.
Once the war began, Zenapon and his
10,000 men marched across Persia under
the command of Cyrus.
On his journey, Zenapon was impressed by
the sights of the empire. Among them,
several pontoon bridges of the kind that
the Persians excelled in and a number of
Persian garden paradises. [music]
Thus, Cyrus set out from Sardis and
marched on and on through Lydia to the
river Miander. That river is 200 ft
broad, but was spanned by a bridge
consisting of seven boats. Crossing it,
he marched to Kelan, a populous city,
large and prosperous. Here Cyrus owned a
palace and a large pack full of wild
beasts which he used to hunt on
horseback whenever he wished to give
himself or his horses exercise. Through
the midst of the park flows the river.
The usurper Cyrus finally met his
brother in battle at a place called
Kunaka.
There in the midst of the mele he saw
the king artac Xerxes.
Cyrus charged into the thick of the
fighting as Zenapon describes.
With the cry of I see the man, Cyrus
rushed upon him and struck him in the
breast and wounded him through his
breastplate. While Cyrus was delivering
his stroke, however, someone hit him
with a hard blow under the eye with a
javelin and then followed a struggle
between the king and Cyrus and the
attendants who supported each of them.
While reeling from this wound, Cyrus was
stabbed in the leg and fell to the
ground where his head struck a stone and
he was killed.
Zenapon's Greeks had carried themselves
well in the battle. But now, with the
usurper dead, his cause died with him.
His army scattered in all directions,
and the Greeks had to flee back
westwards as fast as they could, with
the Persians chasing close behind.
The war of the brothers was over, but
Artac Xerxes reign, although a long one
at 46 years, was to be a troubled one.
Egypt successfully rebelled against him
at the start of his rule, and his
attempts to retake it would fail.
In fact, Egypt would leave the empire
entirely for a full 60 years.
This imperial failure emboldened others
and soon further rebellions spread all
around the empire.
One of these known as the great satraps
revolt saw western satropies in Asia
Minor such as Lydia, Armenia and Friia
rise up against Artac Xerxes's rule.
Added to this, the Greeks of Sparta were
now aiding the rebels.
The writer Diodorus Sichulus writes
about the situation the king faced as
the whole empire seemed to rise up in
revolt.
The inhabitants of the Aiatic coast
revolted from Persia and some of the
satraps and generals rising in
insurrection made war on Artis Xerxes.
At the same time, Tacos, the Egyptian
king, decided to fight the Persians and
prepared [music] ships and gathered
infantry forces. At one and the same
time, he had to fight the Egyptian king,
the Greek cities of Asia, the Spartans,
and the allies of these who had agreed
upon making common cause with them.
To quell these rebellions, the king
increasingly relied on the services of
mercenaries, many of them Greeks.
Using these forces, he was able to put
down the revolt by 362 BC. But each
conflict was ruinously expensive, and
the empire must have felt increasingly
fragile as the decades of the mid 4th
century wore on.
His son, Artac Xerxes III, carried on in
this vein.
He led one unsuccessful campaign to
recapture Egypt, but managed it on his
second try.
But Egypt by that point had had a taste
of freedom and would never again sit
happily within the empire.
Due to their constant rebellions, Artac
Xerxes III set about a reign of terror
in Egypt during which many were killed
and temples were destroyed.
He raised taxes there to punishingly
cruel amounts, hoping to impoverish the
Egyptians [music] and reduce their
ability to rebel.
One Egyptian text known as the Demotic
Chronicle seems to record [music] this
time of hardship and cruelty.
Our lakes and our islands are full of
tears. The houses of the people of Egypt
don't [music] have people to live in
them. The Persians will massacre them.
They will take their houses and live
there. They are massacring the people of
Egypt while the sun looks on.
>> The Persian Empire had always ruled with
a degree of compromise and [music]
consent from its subjects. But now that
era was coming to an end,
but the end of the Persian Empire would
not come through rebellion.
In the final years of Artac Xerxes's
reign, he became concerned about the
growing threat of one northerly Greek
kingdom, one that was slowly gathering
power to itself and achieving what
neither Athens nor Sparta had ever been
able to do. The near unification of
Greece under a single king.
That power was Macedon.
And the man who ruled it was named
Philillip.
Macedon had once been a Persian subject.
They had helped King Xerxes during his
invasion of Greece. But after the
Persian withdrawal from Europe following
their defeat at the battle of Platea,
Macedon was left to its own devices.
It had flourished as a Persian subject
and adopted elements of the Persian
courtly culture into its royal palaces.
Although they spoke a dialect of Greek
and shared many aspects of Greek
culture, the Macedonians were always
considered outsiders by the Athenians
and other southern Greeks.
They looked down on Macedonians as brash
and rough and were shocked at their
seemingly barbarian customs.
They married multiple wives, drank their
wine without watering it down, and rode
and hunted on horseback.
In fact, the Macedonian cavalry was
among the most skilled in the region.
The king of Macedon was a man named
Philip II.
He had become king at the age of 23 at a
time when the kingdom was struggling.
faced with numerous powerful Greek
rivals.
But over the next decades, he along with
his generals and advisers continued a
series of rapid reforms that led to
enormous success.
A key part of this success was Philip's
reforming of the Macedonian army.
For centuries, Greek soldiers had fought
in falances, a formation where they
locked their shields together and formed
a bristling wall of spears.
The Greeks had used this formation to
devastating effect on battlefields like
Marathon and Thermopoly.
These spears were 2 to 3 m in length.
And since they were longer than the
spears used by the Persians, they had
allowed Greek soldiers a crucial
tactical advantage, allowing multiple
lines of men to engage the enemy at
once.
Philip's new idea was quite simple, to
make these spears even longer.
In fact, they would be about as long as
it was possible for a man to carry,
about 5 to 7 m in length, as tall as a
lamp post.
The Roman writer Palibius describes the
formation of these falances.
When the phallank has its characteristic
virtue and strength, nothing can sustain
its frontal attack or withstand the
charge. For since when it is closed up
for action, the length of the pikes is
16 cubits. Thus, each man of the first
rank must have the points of five pikes
extending beyond him, each at a distance
of two cubits from the next.
These spears would form a bristling
porcupine that was able to effortlessly
hold enemy troops at bay. And while the
enemy was thus held in place, the
Macedonian heavy cavalry would sweep
into their sides like a hammer on an
anvil.
This combination of pike and horse was
so effective that in little more than 10
years, Philip of Macedon was able to
conquer a large area of mainland Greece
and even defeated the ancient cities of
Athens and thieves.
After that, he founded an alliance known
as the League of Corinth, a confederacy
of Greek cities that recognized Macedon
and Philip as the ruler of all Greece.
But Philip was not content.
He believed that across the sea, the
empire of Persia was now a weakened
edifice.
It had expended its strength on internal
rebellions and civil wars, but had also
grown complacent when it came to outside
threats.
Their soldiers hadn't fought a battle
against a foreign enemy in decades.
Their tactics were outdated, and their
commanders were inexperienced.
Meanwhile, the Macedonians had honed
their skills over years of combat within
Greece.
Now with virtually all Greece united
around him, Philip set his sights on
Asia.
Whether King Artex Cerxes III would have
been able to meet the disaster that was
about to land on his shores, we will
never know since he would meet his end
in another episode of Persian court
intrigue.
In the year 338 BC, a court unic called
Bagoas plotted with the king's physician
to poison him.
After that, Bagawas installed the king's
youngest son on the throne, presumably
intending to use him as a puppet. But
when the young boy wasn't as pliable as
he hoped, he had him poisoned, too.
Then, Bagoas installed a distant
relative named Artiata
to rule.
This man would take the throne name of
Darius III and one of his first acts was
quite wisely to have the poisoning
unicas killed by drinking his own
poison.
Darius was [music] about 44 years old
when he came to the throne. As a young
man, he had distinguished himself as a
warrior, once killing an enemy on the
battlefield in single combat and had
been awarded by being made the satrap of
Armenia.
But his warrior days were now well
behind him, and he had spent the last
years as the head of the empire's postal
service, a distinguished but relatively
peaceful position.
He had come to the throne in peculiar
and murky circumstances, and people's
faith in his rule must have been
fragile.
What Darius III needed was time. Time to
shore up loyalty among his satraps. Time
to cement his hold on power in the
empire. Time to ensure the quality of
his fighting forces.
But time was the one thing that Darius
didn't have.
That's because on the other side of the
sea, at the same time as the new king
Darius was being crowned, another
assassination took place.
In Macedon, in the capital of Agi, the
Macedonian king Philip II was
celebrating the wedding of one of his
daughters.
Diodoras Siculus paints a picture of the
scene.
He wanted as many Greeks as possible to
take part in the festivities in honor of
the gods and so planned brilliant
musical contests and lavished banquetss
for his friends and guests. But as the
praises and congratulations of all rang
in his ears, suddenly without warning,
the plot against the king was revealed
as death struck.
From the crowd, a man bearing a dagger
stepped forwards.
[screaming and cheering]
When Philip directed his attending
friends to proceed him into the theater,
while the guards kept their distance, he
saw that the king was left alone, rushed
at him, pierced him through his ribs,
and stretched him out dead.
According
to ancient sources, this man killed
Philillip because the king had failed to
punish one of his vassels who had abused
him. It was a story of petty court
rivalries and wounded honor.
But the king's young son and heir
believed differently.
He believed that his father had been
killed by a trained assassin paid for by
their great rivals across the sea, the
Persian Empire and the new king of
kings, Darius III.
Now Philip's Macedonian Empire and its
revolutionary and battleh hardened army
would pass on to his son whose heart was
filled with rage and thoughts of
vengeance.
a young man of about 20 whose name meant
defender of men from the Greek alexane
to defend and andros [music]
men.
His name was Alexandros,
but we know him as Alexander. [music]
Just as with previous conquerors like
Cyrus the Great, the life of Alexander
has been pieced together from incomplete
and fragmentaryary sources. All of them
written down centuries after he was born
and often far away in the Roman Empire,
although some do draw on earlier texts
that have been lost.
What we do know is that during the first
two years of his reign as king of
Macedon, the young Alexander
distinguished himself for his
ruthlessness and brutality.
After the death of Philillip, the cities
of southern Greece saw their opportunity
for freedom from Macedonian control.
The city of thieves broke out in open
rebellion and Alexander marched south to
crush them.
Alexander had spent much of his youth
accompanying his father on campaign and
he was well-versed in the Macedonians
innovative style of warfare.
He captured the city of thieves and
utterly destroyed it, massacring its
population and selling 30,000 of its
people into slavery. As Diodoras of
Sicily recounts,
as the slaughter mounted and every
corner of the city was piled high with
corpses, no one could have failed to
pity the plight of the unfortunates.
So it was that many terrible things
befell the city. Greeks were mercilessly
slain by Greeks. Relatives were
butchered by their own relatives. And
even a common dialect induced no pity.
The selling of Greeks into slavery was
still considered a great taboo, and it
was a clear sign that Alexander intended
to [music] continue ruling over Greece
with an iron fist.
In thieves, Alexander left only the
temples to the gods standing and
reportedly a house that had once
belonged to the poet Pindar whom he
admired.
With the rest of Greece now terrified
into line, Alexander set out on what had
been his father's great ambition.
A fullscale invasion of the Persian
Empire, now infused with all the
impetuousness of youth, as Diodoras of
Sicily [music] describes.
The king returned with his army to
Macedonia, assembled his military
commanders and his noblest friends, and
posed for discussion the plan for
crossing over to Asia. His generals
advised him to produce an heir first,
and then to turn his hand to so
ambitious an enterprise. But Alexander
was eager for action, and opposed to any
postponement.
That Alexander was a young man who had
never lost a battle was reason enough
for him to be confident.
But all his life he had also been told
that he was descended from the mythical
demigod Heracles through his father's
line.
He had also grown up reading the stories
of Homer's Iliad, a story of a great war
in the east. and he was inspired by the
story of the great hero Achilles.
All of this combined to make him a man
of singular and remorseless focus.
In spring of 334 BC, Alexander crossed
the Hellellispont with 30 to 40,000 of
Macedon's best warriors.
When the local Persian satraps heard
about the arrival of this army, they
gathered their own forces along with a
few thousand Greek mercenaries and went
out to meet him.
One Greek general from roads, a man
named Menon, who like the mysticles had
come to Persia to seek his fortune,
acted as an adviser to the western
satraps.
He advised the Persians not to fight
Alexander with their inexperienced
forces and instead to adopt a scorched
earth policy, luring his men into the
interior and denying them any food or
supplies. As the Roman period writer
Arian recounts,
Menon the Rodian advised them not to
risk a conflict with the Macedonians
since they were far superior to
themselves in infantry. And Alexander
was there in person whereas Darius was
not with them. He advised them to
advance and destroy the fields by
trampling them down under their horses
hooves to burn the crops in the country
and not even to spare the very cities.
For then Alexander will not be able to
stay in the land from lack of
provisions.
The Persians, understandably reluctant
to burn their own people's property,
refused.
They met Alexander in battle at the
Granicus River, and there his
experienced Macedonian spearmen and
hardened cavalry smashed the Persian
force.
Alexander allowed the Persian army to
leave the battlefield,
but the Greek mercenaries who had fought
on the Persian side, he treated with
exceptional severity as traitors, as
Arian recounts.
He soon completely surrounded them and
cut them up so that none of them escaped
except such as might have concealed
themselves among the dead bodies.
From there he conquered all the way
through Asia Minor, capturing Greek
cities like Ephesus, Mitus and Herodas'
hometown of Hakarnasses.
The Persians likely assumed that he
would stop there, interested only in
liberating the Greekeaking regions of
the empire.
But to their dismay, Alexander kept
going.
In autumn of 333 BC, he marched through
the Silissian gates and down into the
region of Syria.
Distraught, the Persian king Darius III
now marched to meet Alexander.
He was able to surprise the Macedonian,
sweeping down on the rear of his ranks
at a wide plane near a place called
Isus, now on the Syrian border with
Turkey.
Alexander swung around to prevent being
cut off, and the armies came together.
At first, the Persians had great
success.
Darius had brought with him a large
number of Greek mercenaries, perhaps as
many as 12,000 men, and these fared well
against the Macedonians.
But at a crucial moment in the battle,
Alexander made a daring and impetuous
gamble.
He rode at the head of his cavalry and
led them in a desperate charge directly
at Darius himself. Insconced in his
royal bodyguard,
it was a dangerous and unorthodox move.
Darius, seeing that he was the target of
this charge, withdrew to a safer
position.
But this withdrawal began a domino
effect among the Persian lines.
The historian Arian recounts what
happened next.
>> The Persians did not give way until they
perceived that Darius had fled. Then at
last there ensued a decided flight and
on all sides. The horses of the Persians
suffered much injury in the retreat, and
the horsemen themselves, being so many
in number, and retreating in panic
terror without any regard to order along
narrow roads, were trampled on, and
injured no less by each other than by
the pursuing enemy.
The battle was a disaster.
Darius barely escaped with his life, and
the Persian army was scattered in all
directions.
As a final devastating blow, Alexander
swept into Darius's camp and captured
the women of his court, his mother, his
wives, and concubines.
Humiliated and eager to plead for the
safe return of his family, Darius sent
an envoy to Alexander, [music]
but the Macedonian refused to free the
court women and sent back the following
reply to the Persian king.
Your ancestors invaded Macedonia and the
rest of Greece and did us harm, although
we had not done you any previous [music]
injury.
I have been appointed commander and
chief of the Greeks and it is with the
aim of punishing the Persians that I
have crossed into Asia.
To many Greeks, this may have appeared
somewhat hypocritical since Alexander
himself had invaded much of Greece
alongside his father and had burned
thieves, one of its most ancient cities,
to the ground.
Still, Alexander's list of accusations
went on.
>> My father died at the hands of
conspirators instigated by you.
You sent unfriendly letters to the
Greeks about me to push them to war
against me and sent money to the
Spartans and some other Greeks. But now
I have defeated in battle first your
generals and satraps and now you in
person in your army and by the grace of
the gods I control [music] the country.
Approach me therefore as the lord of all
Asia.
If you wish to lay claim to the title
[music] of king then stand your ground
and fight for it. Do not take to flight
as I shall pursue you wherever you may
be.
From there, Alexander marched through
Palestine, conquering cities as he went.
He besieged the Phoenician island city
of Ty, which held out for 7 months,
after which he ordered its population to
be massacred, and 2,000 of its defenders
to be crucified along the shoreline for
daring to hold out against him.
This was an exceptionally brutal act by
Greek standards, and few Persian kings
had ever used such a gruesome spectacle.
In the town of Gaza, Alexander also
slaughtered every one of the 10,000 men
in the city and sold the women and
children into slavery.
When the Persian commander refused to
kneel to him, Alexander ordered that he
be dragged behind a horse until he died.
A punishment likely inspired by Homer's
Iliad, in which Achilles drags the
Trojan hero Hector behind his chariot.
From there he marched into Egypt.
There sources claim that he was welcomed
with open arms since the relationship
between Egypt and Persia had soured so
much in the preceding decades.
But really the Egyptians had little
choice.
They had been largely disarmed after
their recent rebellions. And Alexander
had made clear in Ty and Gaza that he
was willing to take revenge against
civilian populations who resisted him.
In 332 BC, Alexander was crowned pharaoh
in Memphis nearly 200 years after Cyrus
the Great's son, Kambisces.
After the wounding loss at Isus, Darius
III retreated to Babylon and there began
to gather an even more massive army.
Seemingly as a ploy to buy time, Darius
sent Alexander an envoy, offering to
surrender the western half of the
empire, everything beyond the river
Euphrates to Alexander.
But the Macedonian refused, repeating
once again that he was now king of all
Asia and that soon all of Darius's
empire would be his.
The final decisive clash would occur in
331 BC when Alexander set out again for
Mesopotamia
to confront Darius III for good.
On the 20th of September, 10 days before
the battle, the Babylonian Astronomical
Diaries record that an apocalyptic sign
appeared in the heavens just after
sunset.
On the 13th day of the month of Ulu in
the fifth year of Darius,
there was an eclipse of the moon which
was entirely darkened as Jupiter set.
Saturn was four fingers distant.
As the eclipse became total, a westerly
wind was blowing. As the moon became
visible again, an easterly wind arose.
During the eclipse, there were deaths
and plagues.
For the Macedonians, this celestial
event was an omen of victory, a sign
that a great empire would soon also
beclipsed.
But for the Persians, the event was an
omen of doom.
The two armies met at a small village
named Gaamela on the banks of the river
Bumodus near to modern-day Erbil in
northern Iraq on the 1st of October 331
BC.
During the battle that followed, despite
being outnumbered, Alexander once again
prevailed and Darius fled east.
Now completely unopposed, Alexander
marched to Babylon and the great city
surrendered without a fight.
He entered through the great Ishtar gate
and down the processional way in
triumph.
The Roman period writer Curteus Rufus
describes this moment.
Alexander put himself at the head of his
column which he formed into a square and
ordered his men to advance into the city
as if they were going into battle.
A large number of the Babylonians had
taken up a position on the walls, eager
to have a view of their new king, but
most went out to meet him. They had
carpeted the whole road with flowers and
garlands, and set up at intervals on
both sides, silver altars heaped, not
just with frankincense, but with all
manner of perfumes.
Herds of cattle and horses, and lions,
too, and leopards carried along in
cages. Next came the magi chanting a
song in their native fashion and also
musicians.
Alexander and his men were astonished at
the site of Babylon. By far the largest,
wealthiest, and most well-developed city
they had ever seen.
It was the city itself with its beauty
and antiquity that commanded the
attention not only of the king but of
all the Macedonians. Its wall is 10 m
wide and it is [music] said that two
chariots meeting on it can safely pass
each other. The two parts of the city
are connected by a stone bridge over the
river and this is also reckoned among
the wonders of the east.
The Macedonians who had grown up in the
hardy mountains of northern Greece were
greatly affected by the sights of the
sophisticated and wealthy Persian Empire
and found Persian influences already
taking hold of them. As Diodoras of
Sicily recounts,
Alexander began to imitate the Persian
luxury and the extravagant display of
the kings of Asia. He put on the Persian
diadem and dressed himself in the white
robe and the Persian sash and everything
else except the trousers and the
long-sleeved upper garment. He
distributed to his companions cloaks
with purple borders and dressed [music]
the horses in Persian harness.
Others feared that Alexander was less
overcoming Persia and more being
overcome by it. As the Roman historian
Curteus Rufus remarks
>> in the whole camp, the feeling and the
talk of all was that more had been lost
by victory than had been gained by war.
That they themselves were conquered men
when [music] they had surrendered
themselves to alien and foreign habits.
While Alexander reveled in his victory
and tried on new clothes, the Persian
Emperor Darius fled ever further
eastwards up into the Iranian plateau.
There he hoped to gather another army to
stop the relentless advance of the
Macedonians
and around him the Persian Empire began
to collapse.
After a month's stay in Babylon around
November 331 BC, Alexander set out in
pursuit.
The fine Persian roads dotted with
wells, way stations, and supply depots
had once been the empire's great
strength. But now they became a
liability.
Alexander and his men advanced rapidly
along these highways and were soon at
the foothills of the Zagros mountains,
the only obstacle now standing between
them and the capital of the Sepilolis.
There in a remarkable echo of the battle
of Thermopoly, a Persian army under the
command of Ario Batsanes, the satrap of
para staged a heroic defense in the
mouth of a narrow pass called the
Persian gates.
The Persians held this pass for a full
month, during which time Alexander's
soldiers were brought to a standstill
and suffered heavy losses.
But just as Xerxes had 150 years
earlier, [music]
the Macedonians eventually found a
narrow path through the mountains and
were able to surround the [music]
Persian defenders.
The path to the Persian capital was
[music] now open.
In late January of 330 BC, 4 years after
he had landed in Asia, Alexander and his
men arrived in Hepilus.
The Greek writer Diodorus of Sicily
recounts the [music] fine city that
Alexander found.
It was the richest city under the sun
and the private houses had been
furnished with every sort of wealth over
the years. Many of the houses belong to
the common people and were abundantly
supplied with furniture and wearing
apparel of every kind. The citadel is a
noteworthy one and is surrounded by a
triple wall.
Scattered about the royal terrace were
residences of the kings and quarters for
the great generals. All luxuriously
furnished and buildings suitably made
for guarding the royal treasure.
Perhaps in retribution for holding out
so long at the Persian gates, Alexander
ordered his soldiers to treat the people
of Pepilolis much like those of [music]
Ty and Gaza. They slaughtered all the
men and enslaved all the women.
The palace they looted with impunity.
Archaeology shows that they tore through
the halls of Pipilus in haste, ripping
gold ornaments from the walls and
leaving much behind scattered on the
flagstones. [screaming]
Much of the fine stone table wear and
everything else too heavy to take with
them, they simply smashed on the floor.
After picking the palace clean of every
gold object they could carry, either
deliberately or as a drunken accident,
according to some sources, Alexander
then burned down the royal palace of the
great king and much of the city around
it.
The flames would have been visible for
miles and a great column of black smoke
would have climbed into the sky.
The thick cedar rafters of the 100
columned halls would have smoldered and
finally fallen in.
The gold looted from the treasuries of
Pipilis supposedly weighed 120,000
talents or nearly 4,000 tons.
The Macedonians needed thousands of
camels to carry it away.
This gold had been the treasury of the
empire that kept its welloiled machine
running. And in looting it, Alexander
had ripped the heart out of the Aminid
system.
Next, Alexander marched to Pasagai
where he briefly stopped at the tomb of
Cyrus the Great, as Strao describes.
Alexander then went to Pasarad and this
too was an ancient royal residence. Here
he saw also in a park the tomb of Cyrus.
It was a small tower and was concealed
within the dense growth of trees. He
passed through the entrance and saw a
golden couch, a table with cups, a
golden coffin, and numerous garments and
ornaments set with precious stones, and
that he saw all these things on his
first visit, but that on a later visit
the place had been robbed, and
everything had been carried off, and
that the robbers had removed the corpse
to another place.
If this is true, then it's clear that
Persian royal authority had by that
point completely [music] collapsed.
From there, Alexander continued to
[music] pursue Darius high up into the
Iranian plateau, chasing him a distance
of more than a thousand km [music]
across the winding roads of the Eastern
Empire.
But he would not catch him.
Darius III was eventually murdered by
his own satrap, [music] a man named
Bessos high in the hills near Ekbata.
Bessos would name himself the new
Akeminid [music] king, even taking the
royal name Artac Xerxes V and intending
to raise an army in the eastern [music]
province of Bactrea.
But by this time he controlled only the
easternmost quadrant of the empire and
his time [music] would be short.
Eventually Bessus was captured and
Alexander perhaps enraged that he had
robbed him of the joy of killing Darius
himself ordered the treacherous general
to be flogged, mutilated, and finally
killed in an ostentatious display of
cruelty.
With the death of Bessus, Persia was now
completely in the hands of Alexander.
But his men were exhausted, and it's
clear that Alexander was beginning to
lose touch with reality.
In his escapade across the collapsing
empire, he had met with little
resistance, and he had begun to believe
that he could conquer the entire world.
As one anecdote related in Plutarch's
Moralia illustrates,
>> it is reported that King Alexander the
Great, hearing an Axarus, the
philosopher, discoursing that there were
infinite worlds, fell a weeping.
Have I not good cause to weep? Quote he,
that being as there are an infinite
number of worlds, I'm not yet the Lord
of one.
Finally, Alexander reached the
easternmost border of the empire that he
had destroyed.
And even then, he wanted to keep on
conquering.
With the Himalayan mountains rising blue
in the far distance, he led an
expedition into the Punjab in northern
India. And here the adventure came to an
end.
Alexander's men were by that point used
to facing the scattered remnants of
Persian resistance. But the moment they
left the old empire, they faced the
strong independent kingdoms of India and
Alexander's forces struggled. As
Plutarch recounts,
>> the combat in India was of a more mixed
kind, but maintained with such obstinacy
that it was not decided till the 8th
hour of the day. As for the Macedonians,
this struggle blunted their courage and
stayed their further advance into India.
For they were told that the kings of
India were awaiting them with 80,000
horsemen, 200,000 footmen, 8,000
chariots, and 6,000 fighting elephants.
While Alexander may have styled himself
as the lord of all Asia, in reality, he
had only defeated a single power, the
Aminate Empire, and inherited its ruins.
Alexander eventually listened to reason
[music] and agreed to turn back.
On the return journey to Babylon, for
unknown reasons, Alexander declined to
use the well-worn Persian road that led
inland and instead ordered his men to
march through a waste known as the
Gedrosian Desert, now in modern
Pakistan.
Some sources claim he did this in order
to punish his men for refusing to
continue on into India, whereas others
say he wanted to complete another
glorious exploit like his ancestor
Heracles to add to his growing legend.
Either way, the route was a disaster. As
the writer Arian describes,
>> the blazing heat and the lack of water
caused innumerable casualties of thirst
or from the effects of the deep burning
sunbaked sand. Sometimes they met with
lofty hills of sand, loose, deep sand
into which they sank as if it were mud
or untrodden snow. The mules and horses
suffered even greater distress from the
uneven and treacherous surface of the
track.
It was perhaps at this moment that
Alexander might have realized the debt
he owed to the Persian roadbuilders who
had made his eastward journey so easy.
The fact that they never knew when they
would find water made regular normal
marches impossible. Casualties among the
animals were very numerous. Often they
were killed deliberately by the men who
butchered the mules and horses whenever
supplies gave out and then ate their
flesh.
It was only through a stroke of luck
that the army was able to find the sea
coast and followed it west out of the
desert and towards [music] home.
By some reports, 3/4 of Alexander's men
died on this stretch of the journey.
In the Gedrosian desert, Alexander may
have realized that it wasn't so easy
conquering when someone hadn't already
done most of the work for you.
But what had Alexander conquered?
It was an empire that he had no hope of
successfully administrating. An empire
made up of people who didn't speak his
language, held together by an
administrative regime he didn't
understand, and by the promise of
Persian safety, stability, and gold.
Alexander didn't have any heirs since he
had left home as a young man and spent
his whole adult life chasing glory
across Asia.
When he returned to Babylon in April of
323 BC, weakened and exhausted from his
journey across the Gedrosian desert,
Alexander didn't have long left to live.
Our story began in the city of Babylon
with its rebellion against the Assyrian
Empire. And it's in this city that our
story will also end.
In June, just two months after returning
to Babylon, Alexander sickened and died,
refusing to name a successor.
The territory that had once been the
Persian Empire, the largest and
wealthiest the world had ever known, was
carved up among his generals.
These generals and their descendants
would spend the next 200 years fighting
amongst one another. As Diodoras of
Sicily recalls,
when he was quitting life in Babylon,
and at his last breath was asked by his
friends to whom he was leaving the
kingdom, he said, "To the best man, for
I foresee that a great combat of my
friends will be my funeral games."
And this actually happened for after the
death of Alexander, the foremost of his
friends quarreled about the primacy and
joined in many great combats.
With these wars, the descendants of the
Macedonian [music] conquerors would try
to put back together what they had
broken to reunify an empire that had
ruled in stability for more than two
centuries.
But none of them would succeed.
Before long, the Akeminid Persian Empire
was all but forgotten. Except as the
villains in the stories that the Greeks
still told themselves [music] in their
streets and theaters,
the language of old Persian would
gradually pass [music] out of use along
with the use of cuneaoifor. And as the
centuries went by, people forgot how to
read the [music] inscriptions still
carved into the palaces and pillars,
into the stones and cliff faces [music]
of the Iranian mountains.
The empires that followed, the
Cassenians and the Paththeians [music]
drew their lineages back to a mythical
Iranian heritage, but the legacy of the
Akeminids was remembered only in the
tiniest fragments.
While some Aminid cities like Susa and
Ekbata [music] continued to be important
population centers in later periods,
others saw a more rapid decline.
The garden city of Pasagada, always more
of a royal complex than a true city, was
rapidly abandoned.
Its blooming parkland would have
overgrown with scrub and weeds, its
water channels filled with silt and
finally stopped working entirely. Its
imported trees and shrubs would have
died. And before long, the once paradise
of the Persian kings would have blown
away with the loose layer of top soil.
The blackened ruin of the palaces at
Pepilolis would stand for some time over
the city and over the following
centuries it would decline steadily.
Eventually it was little more than a
village and then the people left
entirely.
Sand and earth would soon blow over the
slowly crumbling stones of the palace
that still bore the following
inscription.
King of kings, king of countries,
containing many kinds of men. King in
this great earth far and wide.
In 1906, the American scholar of Iranian
languages, AV Williams Jackson, traveled
through Persia and visited the site of
Pasagadi.
There he wrote the following description
of its wasted and melancholy appearance.
Saradeay and Percepilus are sad themes
for both are silent cities of a dead
past.
Cyrus and Darius still remain in effigy
of stone and the vestigages of royal
halls untenanted for more [music] than
2,000 years bear witness to the departed
splendor of a period of grandeur.
To Jackson, the ruins appeared as
reminders of the fearsome power of time.
>> Here, ruin reigns supreme,
and even the tombs that housed the
bodies of the dead kings have been
crumbling for ages.
Time's relentless touch has worn away
the clear-cut features of these
monuments and destroyed the beauty of
their linaments. Yet they still endure
to mark daily by their shadows the
advance of centuries across the dial of
eternity.
Williams Jackson also visited the tomb
of Cyrus the Great.
He even stepped inside its inner
chamber. But what he found disappointed
him.
The condition of the royal chamber is
not what it once was. Innumerable
graffiti cover the walls. But most
inharmonious of all, for it hung all
over the place where the body must have
lain, was a cord with an inongruous
collection of worthless trash in the way
of votive offerings.
A piece of rag, a bit of brass, a
fragment of a lamp, a bell, a copper
ring, and whatnot made up the mly
string.
He turned to leave, but as he did, for a
moment, the ancient power of the site
reasserted itself. And for a moment, he
felt connected to the monumental nature
of the history that had happened here.
As I slowly [music] descended the deep
steps and mounted my horse, the sun sank
low behind the western hills.
I turned for a last look at the historic
shrine.
A vision seemed to rise before my view,
and I saw in fancy the scene of the last
rights of the great king.
I still could hear the tramplings of the
horses that led the funeral train. The
measured tread of the soldiers in
clanking armor rang dullly on my ear.
And the chanting voice of the magian
priest in toning per chance the
Zoroastrian psalm comeo zam to what land
am I going beat rhythmically through my
brain.
Then the shroud of darkness fell like a
paw upon the plain, and the moon rose
slowly over the distant hills.
The Athenian playwright escalus fought
the Persians for much of his life. He
had been a hoplight at the battle of
Marathon when he was around 35 years old
and fought again 10 years later at the
sea battle of Salamus and the final
decisive confrontation of Platea.
He would be remembered to history as the
father of Greek tragedy and the writer
of more than 70 plays of which only
seven have survived.
But when he died, he wanted to be
remembered not for his writing but for
the part he had played on the
battlefield.
On his gravestone, he asked that the
following inscription be left.
the marathon also anos
epistaminos.
>> Beneath this stone lies,
son of Euphorian the Athenian who
perished in the wheatbearing land of
Jella. of his noble prowess. The grove
of Marathon can speak, and the
long-haired Persian knows it well.
But despite his pride in the part he had
taken in these battles, Iscilus also
knew the horrors of war.
While his plays glorified Greek
victories, they also gave voice to his
Persian enemies and asked his audience
to extend the hand of humanity to the
Persian men who had died on the beaches
and in the fields of Greece for the
vanity of kings.
In his play, the Persians he offers a
kind of lament for all those who had
died in these wars.
This lament now stands as a kind of
epitth for the entire Persian Empire as
its palaces stood in ruins, its people
scattered, and the sun finally set on
the Aminid world.
True guardians are we of many a temple
rich in gold and holy whom our lord and
king for age and honor has extolled
to watch his land forlorn
for all the strength of Asia born like
hounds at a young master's horn
baying away has flown
and Now for long no royal host comes no
rider from the host
back to great Persia's throne
from Agatan from Susa
from ancient kiss guarded wall we saw
the horse and chariot go the gliding
ships the footmen slow
so has the flower of Persia's youth
departed and in fierce longing full many
a wife and mother staying
waiting as day still follows day and
dread the lengthening delay.
Therefore does my spirit mourn robed in
darkness racked with fear.
Lest cry the people here.
Wo wo wo for Persia's host for lawn
ringing through the wide empty streets
of Seuss's lonely land.
Thank you once again for listening to
the Fall of Civilizations podcast.
I'd like to thank my voice actors for
this episode. Michael Hajantonis,
Alexandra Bolton, Simon Jackson, Tom
Marshall Lee, Chris Harvey, Jack Jacobs,
Nick Denton, Amirit Sandu, Paul Cassell,
Tim Stevenson, and Amin Tahare.
Readings in old Persian were performed
by Dr. Matin M. Arandapur.
in Spanish by Scott Fins. Readings in
Greek were performed by Demetrius
Chavez.
Singing of the Zoroastrian gathers was
performed by Ardolan.
The theme music is Home at Last by John
Bartman. Sound design was by [music]
Alexe Cibikin.
I'd also like to thank my historical
adviser for this episode, Dr. Matin M.
Arandapur at the University of Oxford.
Matine works with the research team,
Invisible East, which works to shed new
light on the medieval history of Iran,
Afghanistan, and neighboring regions.
You can find them on YouTube and social
media channels.
Major sources used in this episode were
Lindseay Allen's the Persian Empire a
history, the Persian Empire edited by
Amaly K, Persians the age of the great
kings by Lloyd Llewellyn Jones, ancient
Persia by Matt Waters and a history of
ancient Persia by Maria Broius.
A full list of sources will be available
as a link in the podcast and video
description.
I love to hear your thoughts and
responses on social media. So, please
come and tell me what you thought. You
can find me on Instagram at Paulm Cooper
and on Blue Sky at paulmcooper.com.
If you'd like updates about the podcast
and announcements about new episodes,
you can follow the podcast on Blue Sky
at fallofivilizations.com.
This podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on Patreon. You keep me running and help
me to cover my costs. You also let me
dedicate more time to researching,
writing, recording, and editing to get
the episodes out to you faster and bring
as much life and detail to them as
possible.
As a thank you, all subscribers are able
to listen to Fall of Civilizations
completely adree and watch all video
episodes also adree.
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this show possible. If you
enjoyed this episode, please consider
heading on to
patreon.com/fallofivilizations_podcast
or just Google Fall of Civilizations
Patreon. That's p a t r e o n.
For now, all the best and thanks for
listening.